

               CONCEPTBASE RELEASE NOTES

                   Manfred Jeusfeld
                   ConceptBase Team

                 http://conceptbase.cc

                      2019-09-05


ConceptBase is a multi-user deductive object manager mainly developed at 
the University of Skovde, Sweden. Earlier versions were developed in
cooperation withn the team of Matthias Jarke, RWTH Aachen, Germany.

The release notes of earlier versions are available at the end of this file.

The ConceptBase Forum (CB-Forum) is accessible via
    http://conceptbase.sourceforge.net/CB-Forum.html

The list of tickets and their solutions is available at
http://www-i5.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/cgi-bin/cvstrac/cvstrac.cgi/cbase/rptview?rn=4


Detailed Changes since Version 8.0 (2019-05-30)
===============================================

Version 8.1 aims at making the CBserver better integrated with current
exchange formats. TWe are now referring to issue numbers as stored in
the GitLab repository of ConceptBase.cc

81-01 More complete support for JSON output format

   The JSONIC format now should produce valid JSON code and is applicable for
   the listModule query as well as any other query.
   (Issue 1)

81-02 Use subclass relationships derived by DeepTelos to compile formulas

   DeepTelos is an extension to Telos that derives specializations between
   classes (powertype pattern). These specializations are now taken into
   account for checking the type-safety of predicates in rules and
   constraints.
   (Issue 4) 

81-03 New CBShell command 'sub'

   The CBShell command 'sub' lists the currently visible modules; equivalent to
   'ls Module'

81-04 Enable/disable derived links in CBGraph

   A new option of CBGraph allows to enable/disable the display of derived links.
   If disabled, CBGraph is faster in displaying the pop-up menues and showing the
   incoming and outcoming links. However, it cannot show derived links in this case.
   The option is included since some database are too large in combination with
   recursive rules to show derived links.
   (Issue 5)

81-05 Remove FrameTree from CIBiva

   FrameTree ("View Object as Tree") is no longer includes in CBIva since it depends
   on the legacy package Motif, which is not supported by Java 9 and newer. FrameTree
   never gained popularity for inspecting a database. So, users will probably not
   note that it is missung.
   (Issue 6)





Detailed Changes since Version 8.0 (2016-11-28)
===============================================

Version 8.0 aims at making the CBserver services more accessible to
other modeling tools.

80-01 Issue with arrow heads on changing graphical palette

   Ticket 383 introduced a way to draw cleaner arrow heads but retrieving the
   background color. This did not take into account the the background color can
   change by chaning the graphical palette. This should now be solved.

80-02 Certain stratification violations not detected

   If a  call path starts with the positive form of a non-stratified predicate,
   then the stratification violation was not detected. This is now resolved by
   also inserting an 'emptiness obligation' for the positive form of a negated
   predicate call. Two new cases were added to the stratification tester.
   A new CBserver parameter -st can be used to disable the stratification tester.
   (Ticket 374, 388)

80-03 Aggregation function calls can crash

   If an aggregation function like AVG was called with an argument class that has
   non-numerical instances, then this could lead to a crash of the CBserver. 
   This is now resolved.
   (Ticket 389)

80-04 Problem with persistency level

   The object store TBC.cc/SYMTBL.cc reported a problem with the persistency level
   when the CBserver was started in nonpersistent mode. In fact, it did then start
   it in persistent mode. This should now be resolved.

80-05 Restarting upon Prolog exception

   The CBserver has an option -r that allows it to restart when an error occurs, e.g.
   a division by zero. If the error occurs inside the Prolog code, then the SWI-Prolog
   runtine would enter an interactive trace mode to inspect the postmortem data.
   This prevented the automatic restart. This is now addressed inside the Linux script
   'cbserver'.
   (Ticket 390)

80-06 Smaller background box for edge labels

   Edge labels are drawn by drawing the background box in its background color (if
   defined and then writing the edge label into it. We now make the background box
   a bit smaller to avoid that it overlaps with too much of the surroundings.

80-07 String-based API

   The CBclient API now supports a number of String-valued methods to interact with
   a CBserver. This allows for an easier and safer interaction with the CBserver.
   (ticket 393)

80-08 CBserver on Windows 10

   The CBserver now runs again onder Windows 10, using the WSL Linux sub-system 
   of Windows 10. It is available for the 64bit edition of Windows 10.
   (ticket 394)

80-08 Status bar updated when connecting to CBserver

   The CBIva status bar gets some more intermediate updates when connecting to a
   CBserver. Moreover, telling and asking is indicated at the status bar.
   (ticket 395)

80-09 Object-specific graphical properties for CBGraph
   CBGraph can now display objects using 'gproperties' specifically
   assigned to individual objects. They overrule the 'graphical type'
   assigned to the object. Gproperties also work for edges.
   (ticket 397)

80-10 Flexible label lengths
   Node labels may have flexible lengths rather than the fixed maximum of 40 characters.
   The graphical property 'labellength' can be used for that.
   (ticket 399)

80-11 Define emptiness constraint on query classes
   A query class can now be one of the classes that is used to simplify the a meta-formula.
   This leads to the generation of derived formulas. They are attached to the
   super-class of the query class to avoid attaching generated constraints to the query class.
   (ticket 400)

80-12 Quicker upstart of local CBserver
   CBIva now has shorter connection times when upstarting a local CBserver.

80-13 Margin at the left side of the TelosEditor text area & font size
   The TelosEditor text area now adds a 3 point wide margin left of the text
   to improve readability of the text. Moreover, one can now also set
   the font size of the text area to small (12point) or large (18point) via
   the right-click pop-up menu if the text area. Go can set "CBIvaSmallfont" and
   "CBIvaLargefont" in Options/EditOptionsManually of CBIva.

80-14 Display object in CBGraph from TelosEditor
   TelosEditor now supports to display a select object in CBGraph even if CBGraph
   has not been started before. In such cases it is started on the fly.

80-15 Faster start-up of local CBserver
   CBGraph starts up a local CBserver when it cannot find a running CBserver. It used
   a 'sleep' wait of a couple seconds to make sure that the CBserver was up.
   We now use a kind of a ping function to see whether the CBserver is alive
   resulting is quicker start-ups on modern computers. 
   (ticket 401)

80-16 CBGraph auto-connecting to a CBserver
   When CBGraph was called without a GEL file as parameter, it could not easily connect to a
   CBserver. The script file shall now use the empty GEL file lib/ohome.gel from
   the ConceptBase installation directory if no parameter is provided. This shall
   instruct CBGraph to connect to a CBserver when started.
   (ticket 402)

80-17 Metaformula compiler covers more cases
   The metaformula compiler covers more predicate patterns for partially evaluating
   them. This allows more flexibility, e.g. for variants of DeepTelos.
   (ticket 404)

80-18 User-definable edge head shapes
   A new attribute 'edgeheadshape' supports to specify which shape is used at the edge head.
   Possible values are "Arrow", "VeeArrow", "Karo", "Square", "Dot", and "none" (no arrow head).
   (ticket 405)

80-19 Re-defining the defaults in a graphical palette
   The DefaultJavaPalette defines the default graphical types for visualizing Telos objects.
   Some of the graphical types such as the one used for implicitInstanceOf 
   (=derived instantiations) could not be re-defined. Any attempt led to a mal-functioning
   CBGraph. The bug is now resolved.
   (ticket 406)

80-20 Edge nodes jump over rotation axes
   When rotating one node around the other, then edges between the two nodes could jump
   from one side to the other occasionally. This is now much likely.
   (ticket 407)

80-21 Pop-up menu item "Straighten adjacent edges"
   The right-click menu on diagram nodes now includes a function to straighten all adjacent
   edges of the selected CBGraph node.

80-22 Classifying connection to a public CBserver
   Some OS's like Windows-7 cannot start a local CBserver but rather connect to a public CBserver
   (if configured). The rule to classify a connection as a public CBserver did not 
   incorporate the port number. This is now resolved.

80-23 Preserve remote hostname in GEL file
   The GEL files for CBGraph contain the hostname to connect to. If the connection fails (e.g.
   when the network is down), then CBGraph attempts to fall back to localhost. We now
   preserve the original hostname when the GEL file is saved using the fallback localhost.
   This will make sure that the remote host shall always be used in subsequent sessions rather
   than using localhost.

80-24 CBGraph displays currently loaded GEL file
   CBGraph shall now display the currently loaded GEL file in its frame title, much like many
   editors do. It also indicates by a "*" in the internal frame title whether any edit
   was done to the graph displayed in that frame.

80-25 Evaluation of deductive rules up to 30% faster
   The Datalog engine uses now a leaner data structure to store certain derived facts. This
   speeds up the evaluation of deductive rules by up to 30%, depending on thye size and structure
   of the database.
   (ticket 409)

80-26 User-defined graphical types for derived attributes
   One can now define dedicated graphical types for certain derived attributes. Details are
   described in chapter C.4 of the ConceptBase.cc User Manual.
   (ticket 410)

80-27 Issue with locked databases
   A running CBserver locks a database directory such that no other CBserver can start on the same
   database. The lock was not removed correctly when using the -db option rather than the -d
   option. This problem is now resolved.

80-28 Changing synchronization defauts in GEL files
   By default, the module sources in a GEL file are fully snchronized with the CBserver (store module sources
   from GEL file to CBserver at load time; store module sources from CBserver to GEL file at save time).
   This default behavior can be changed by supplying specific options like +r, +w, +rw, -rw in the 
   command line. These parameters are then also stored in the GEL file as the new defaults.
   (Ticket 413)

80-29 Navigating links in CBGraph now faster
   The navigation of incoming and outgoing links in CBGraph is now somewhat faster by a better
   implementation of the underlying builtin predicates in the ConceptBase server. It can still be
   slow for certain databases with a lot of classes for a given start object.
   (Ticket 414)

80-30 Module name in AnswerFormat
   Answer formats can use the {currentmodule} function to include the name of the current module in an
   answer to a query with a dedicated anserr format. In some circumstances, ConceptBase stored the
   full module path instead of the current module name. The full current path can be displayed by
   another function {currentpath}. We now make sure that {currentmodule} always displays the module
   name.

80-31 In(x,x) predicate 
   The predicate call In(x,x) was taking a lot of CPU time due to a missing range for x. This is now
   resolved. (Ticket 412)

80-31 Hide generated code for Views 
   Instances of class View can use the inherited_attribute feature. Such views were displayed
   incorrectly by listModule since the generated super-class of the inherited attributes were 
   displayed in between two frames for the view. ConceptBase can however only compile views
   if they are represneted as a single frame. This is now solved.
   (Ticket 415)

80-32 String handling in answer formats
   The two functions QT ("quote") and UQ ("unquote") are now behaving in a more predictable way.
   A string, which is already quoted, is unchanged by QT. A string, which does not have quotes,
   is left unchanged by UQ.

80-33 Unsorted answers
   Answer sets processed via AnswerFormat are sorted by default. This can now be switched off by
   setting the orderBy flag of the answer format to "none". 
   (Ticket 416)

80-34 More efficient listModule
   The listModule function is very slow when a module has many objects. The reason is a recursive and
   thus inefficient implementation of a query callled DoNotSave_LM. This is now replaced by a more
   efficient query definition. 
   (Ticket 417)

80-35 Display the connection details in Telos Editor
   The Telos Editor text frame now displays the connection details host:port in its title when
   connected.

80-36 Compatibility with Java 9
   We made small changes to the Java sources and compile flags to make it compatible with Java 9.
   (Tickets 419, 420)

80-37 Experimental frame format JSONIC
   An experimental alternative Telos frame format JSONIC is offered as answer format for listModule.
   Currently, only the export of the JSONIC frames is supported. Yash K. has written an Eclipse editor
   supporting this format and converting is to standard Telos FRAME format.
   (Ticket 422)

80-38 Method to clear the contents of a module
   The API method clearall() of LocalCBclient untells all objects defined in the current module
   if that module has no non-empty sub-module. The method is based on the new builtin query
   class purgeModule. Note that untelling is not equivalent to deleting. Untold objects are
   just marked by the transaction time (tell,untell). Thus, consecutive calls of clearall()
   can increase the memory footprint.
   (Ticket 423) 

80-39 Stack overflow when compiling complex ECA rule sets
   The compilation of large cyclic ECA rules could cause stack overflows of the CBserver.
   The problem was an ill-designed tracing procedure that created too many recursive calls was very
   large parameters. The issue has been resolved.
   (Ticket 424) 

80-40 Manage the location of nodes in the graph editor
   The graph editor provides a new option "Freeze / Unfreeze" to lock the position of a node.
   The option is provided in the pop-up menu associated to the right mouse button.
   A frozen node can be unlocked by selecting the option a second time. Moreover,
   CBGraph now checks for graphical type properties "freeze" and "location" sent by the CBserver.
   The property "freeze" leads to freezing the node. The property "location" designated the
   (initial) location of a node. The new function also applies to edges since edges are
   also regarded as special nodes.
   (Ticket 426)

80-41 Read-only mode for ConceptBase
   The CBserver option -s 3 (securityLevel) will enforce read-only access, i.e. no updates are
   possible to any module. Queries creating new numbers (e.g. COUNT queries) are still possible
   though.
   (Ticket 427)

80-42 Problem with connecting to publis CBserver that use different port numbers
   CBIva/CBGraph did not work with public CBservers that used port numbers like 4002. This is now resolved.
   (Ticket 428)

80-42 GEL filename not initialized correctly
   Under certain circumstances, the window to select the location where a GEL file should be stored
   was not initialized with the location of the currently loaded GEL file.
   (Ticket 429)

80-43 Display GEL filename also in internal frame of CBGraph
   The graph internal frame of CBGraph now also displays the GEL file name. If a new GEL file is loaded,
   it gets its own new frame.
   (Ticket 430)

80-44 More flexible use of dedicated answer format when calling a query
   The dedicated 'forQuery' answer format is now only be used when specified by the user in the
   query call or when the user used 'default' as answer format. Otherwise the answer format provided in
   the query call is selected.
   (Ticket 431)

80-45 Functional expressions in predicates
   Functional expressions and complex query calls are only allowing in comparison predicates such as 
   (x < f(y)+1) and in instantiation predicates of conditions such as (x in Q[F(x)/arg1]). They may not
   occur in attribution predicates such as (x m y+1). This is now corrected.
   (Ticket 432)

80-46 JSON-like answer format
   You can now use an experimental JSON-like answer format JSONIC instead of FRAME to get the answer 
   of a query returned as JSON objects. The new feature is not yet bullet-proof but could be useful
   for post-processing the answers of simple ConceptBase queries. Dedicated answer formats are not
   constrained by this feature, i.e. you can define your own JSON-like answer format for specific queries.
   JSONIC works for all queries.
   (Ticket 433)

80-47 Add module comments to listModule header
   Comment lines defined for a module object (instance of class Module) are included in the header
   generated by listModule. It can be used to specify authors, license and other meta data 
   relevant for the module source.
   (Ticket 434)



Detailed Changes since Version 7.8 (2015-05-04)
===============================================

78-01 Remove Solaris support

   Solaris is still supported but we no longer pre-compile the current CBserver
   for Solaris. Hence, it is removed from the documentation.

78-02 Refurbished test suite for ConceptBase development environment

   If you have installed the ConceptBase development environment, then
   you can no test the system via the 'autotestCB' command. The tests
   are virtually the same routines that have been used by the ConceptBase
   Team but now they can be used on any installation of the development
   environment.

78-03 Forgotten case in setting the predicate cache invalid
   The predicate cache stores derived facts to facilitate safe evaluation
   of recursive deductive rules. The cache has to be invalidated when
   the database is updated, in order to recompute the cache in the next
   transaction. This invalidation was missing a certain case when
   the DB was updated by ECA rules while the cache was temporarily suspended.
   The bug could lead to wrong query results when ECA were defined.
   The bug is now resolved.
   (Ticket 367)

78-04 Relative paths for image property in graphical palettes
   The properties 'image' and 'bgimage' for graphical palettes
   now support relative paths. The path is expanded to the default
   location of CBICONS.
   (Ticket 368)

78-05 Added capabilities for click actions
   Click action in graphical types can now have two parameters and
   one can reduce the scope of objects that are refreshed after calling
   the click action.
   (Ticket 369)

78-05 Revamped CBinstaller
   The CBinstaller.jar program is now a self-extracting archive containing
   all required files to run ConceptBase on Windows, Linux, and Mac-OS-X.
   You only need a Java 6 or higher runtime environment.

78-06 Error messages when query call fails
   If a query was unknown, a call to such a query lead to an error and answer 'no'
   but no readable error message was returned. This is now repaired.

78-07 Node level feature for graphs
   The graphical type of a node can now specify a "nodelevel" to control in which
   order nodes are painted. Negative values like "-1" put the node more to the
   background, positive value more to the foreground. The default is "0".
   Negative node levels lead to a custom behavior of such nodes in CBGraph. If they
   are selected by a left mouse-click, then all nodes fully contained in them also get
   selected.
   (Ticket 371) 

78-08 Store module sources and views in sub-directories
   The CBserver option '-ms /' enables the storage of module sources in sub-directories
   that reflect the module structure. For example the module System/oHome/M1 is saved in
   the file <dir>System/oHome/M1/M1.sml, where <dir> is the save directory (typically
   the database directory.
   (Ticket 372, Ticket 381)

78-09 Clang as default C compiler for ConceptBase
   After resolving some incompatibilities with hash_map, we now use clang/clang++
   version 3.4 as the default C compiler for ConceptBase. 
   (Ticket 373)

78-10 tellModel prefers now local files for loading
   The method 'tellModel' used by all CBclients (incl. CBShell) now loads
   local files if they exist locally. In CBShell this affects the method 'tellModel'.
   (ticket 375)

78-11 Bug with partial evaluation repaired
   Certain meta formulas did not partially evaluate correctly. Should now be resolved.
   (ticket 376)

78-12 Public CBserver should kill inactive clients
   A public CBserver (started with -r and -sm slave) should restart when the last "active"
   client exits. Active client means that the client had its last activity less than 2
   hours ago. This helps to restart such public CBservers even if some inactive clients
   are still connected. 
   (ticket 378)

78-13 User names with special characters
   Some operating systems allow special characters as part of the user name, e.g. billy.boy.
   The '.' is an operator in the Telos language, hence should not be part of an object name.
   We now transliterate such characters to '_' to avoid clashes with the tokenizer.
   (ticket 379)

78-14 More flexible rules for administrator
   The rules for the CBserver administrator are now more flexible. First, the user who started the
   CBserver can always shut it down if the client to shut the server down is started on the
   same host. Second, the administrator user (CBserver option -a) can now also include a host
   name like 'billy@myhost' to restrict that only the user 'billy' on host 'myhost' can
   additionally shutdown the CBserver. If you specify 'billy' without host name, then the rights
   are not restricted to a particular host.

78-15 Java 1.8 could cause problems on Ubuntu 16.04
   CBGraph checks the Java version string. Ubuntu 16.04 uses a complex version string for Java
   that caused CBGraph to crash. This should be solved now.

78-16 CBShell "connect" can start a local CBserver
   The command "connect" normally connects the CBShell to a running CBserver. If this
   fails and the local computer is able to start a CBserver, then a local
   CBserver is started on the fly. This allows to use the CBShell for Windows and
   Linux in about the same way.

78-17 CBShell "cd" command can switch to user's home module
   If called without parameters, the "cd" command of CBShell will now switch the module
   context to the user's home module (which could be different from oHome).   

78-18 Java applets no longer supported
   CBIva and CBGraph are no longer supported as Java applets on web pages. You can instead
   configure your browser to startup CBGraph whenever a *.gel file is downloaded from
   a web server.

78-19 New verbose option for CBShell
   The option -v now activates the verbose mode for CBShell. It will then display the command
   and the response on standard output.

78-20 Attempt to list non-existing modules 
   When 'listModule' is called for a non-existing module path, then an answer {* no *}
   is returned.
   (ticket 360)

78-21 New property 'edgeheadcolor' for graphical types
   Link types can now specify the 'edgeheadcolor' in a similar way as 'edgecolor'. The 
   edge head color specifies the color in which the interior of the eadhe head is drawn.
   Specialization links (isA) now have white edge heads by default.
   (ticket 382)

78-22 Cleaner arrow heads
   Arrow heads of edges are now drawn cleaner by removing overlapping edge stroke color.
   (ticket 383)

78-23 Node and edge labels in CBGraph get sized according to their font
   The graphical type can specify font, font size, and font style. This has an impact on the
   dimension of the label displayed in CBGraph. We now re-calculate the dimension if
   the graphical type specifies font details. Previously, labels always got the default
   dimension.

78-24 Some metaformulas fail to be applied/compiled due to tell order
   If several metaformulas are defined/used in a single TELL command,
   then the partial evaluator can fail to generate all necessary code.
   You need to tell the metaformula in a separate TELL command. The
   listModule query will recognize that certain frames were defined in
   different transactions and separate them by a {---}. CBGraph interprets
   these separators and will replay the original sequence of TELL
   commands. The Telos Editor of CBIva shall also process the separator
   {---} to create distinct TELL transactions per segment. 
   (ticket 384)

78-25 Support of color transparency in CBGraph
   CBGraph now supports colors with transparency (also called alpha value)
   for all color elements (bgcolor, textcolor, edgecolor,...). This allows to
   see graphical elements that are placed behind other graphical elements.
   The alpha value is represented as 4th value in a color string. For example,
   "255,0,0,50" is a red color that is around 80% transparent. The alpha value is
   here "50". The maximum value is "255", which stands for 100% intransparent.
   This is also the default.
   (ticket 385)




Detailed Changes since Version 7.7 (2014-09-17)
===============================================

77-01 SET_MODULE_CONTEXT supports relative module path '..'

   The CBserver method SET_MODULE_CONTEXT '..' as shortcut for the supermodule
   of the current module. As a consequence, you can now use 'cd ..' in the CBShell
   to move to the supermodule. The purpose of this update is to mimick a
   filesystem.

77-02 Ask to save graph on exit when graph has been edited

   Similar to text editors, CBGraph shall now ask the user whether an edited graph
   shall be saved when CBGraph is terminated.
   (Ticket 361)

77-03 New property 'textposition' for graphical types

   The new property 'textposition' allows to specify the relative position of the node's
   text to the optional image icon of the node. Positions can be "bottom" (default),
   "top", "left", "right", and "center". The new property only works in combination
   with the 'image' property.

77-04 Improved screenshots in CBGraph

   The screenshots of CBGraph make sure that the node shapes are not overpainted
   by the background color of the node labels. Further, the save screenshot dialogue
   now presets the filetype to PNG and the filename with the name of the graph
   file (if defined).
   (Ticket 362)

77-05 Graphical types combining shapes and images

   The shape property of graphical types can now be combined with the image property.
   This results in nodes where the image is placed within the shape. The image and
   the node label can be aligned w.r.t. the whole node.

77-06 Click-to-play supported for enabled objects in CBGraph

   If the graph type of an object specified a query for the property "clickaction",
   then this query will be called when such an object is clicked in CBGraph.
   The object name is taken as a parameter for the query. This can be used for
   example to "play" a petri net by clicking on the enabled transitions. The
   feature can be de-activated via the options menu of CBGraph.
   (Ticket 363)

77-07 New shapes for graphical types
   The shapes StadionCurve and UpStadionCurve have been added to CBGraph
   as predefined shapes. Both are variants of RoundRectangle, which itself now has
   slightly rounder corners. A shape DownArrow has been added as well. Further, one
   can now define arbitrary polygon shapes for graphical types.

77-08 CBGraph now also runs with newer Java JREs
   Due to some changes in the Swing layout routines, the CBGraph tool did not work
   with Java JRE 1.6.12 or higher, including Java 1.7 and Java 1.8.
   This restriction is now removed. This makes the use of legacy Java JREs obsolete. 
   Java JRE 1.6.10 is still distributed with some versions of the ConceptBase binaries
   and will be called if the host computer has no Java installation.
   (Ticket 216)

77-09 Legacy scripts no longer supported
   The old script startCBserver[.sh,.bat] and startCBiva[.sh,.bat] are no longer exported
   when compiling ConceptBase from its sources. Use the scripts cbserver and cbiva instead.

77-10 CBserver output hidden when trace disabled
   CBIva shall minimize the CBserver trace output window when the trace mode is set to 'no'.
   In this case, the CBserver trace output is not of interest.

77-11 Version message for all ConceptBase tools
   All ConceptBase tools (cbserver, cbshell, cbiva, cbgraph) now support the command line
   option -version. When used, it shall display the tool's version message and then exit,
   analogously to what 'java -version' does.
   
77-12 Cursor set to top position when frames are loaded
   The Telos editor scrollbar is set to the top position when frames are loaded.
   Likewise, the big component text window scrollbar is moved to the top position
   when double-clicking an object in CBGraph.

77-13 New CBserver option -g public
   The CBserver option -g public simplies the setup of a public CBserver. 

77-14 Reduce traffic between CBserver and CBGraph for validating a diagram
   The 'validate' function of CBGraph can take very long since it retrieves
   a single graphical type of a node at a time. A new variant now packs
   several nodes into a single query, thus reducing the number of interactions
   between CBserver and CBGraph.
   (Ticket 364)

77-15 Close operation for CBIva
   The File menu of CBIva now offers a Close operation next to the Exit operation.
   The Close operation should be used when CBIva was started from CBGraph. It shall
   not terminate CBGraph and the connection to the CBserver if CBGraph is still running.

77-16 Show module content when starting CBIva from CBGraph
   If CBIva is started from the File menue of CBGraph, then its Telos editor shall be
   preloaded with the content of the current module. 

77-17 Limit mouse actions when click actions are performed
   When a click action has just been performed, double clicks are disabled for a
   short while (0.7 sec) to prevent that users unintentionally open the component
   view of the clicked node. Moreover, click actions are only performed when the
   left mouse button is pressed.

77-18 Bug with AutoHomeModule fixed
   An auto-home module allows to assign individual workspaces for users. If the
   auto-home module was not declared as an explicit instance of 'Module', this
   function would fail. Specifically, ConceptBase could no longer compute
   the module path to submodules that contain the auto-home module. 
   (Ticket 365)

77-19 CBShell converts (a \= b) into (a = b)
   CBShell converts a substring "\=" of the input line into "=". This causes
   inequality predicates to be converted to equality predicates, which is quite
   disastrous. This bug is now fixed.
   (Ticket 366)

77-20 Fatal error with Java version test
   The CBGraph tool works both with older Java version (prior to 1.6.12) and with
   newer ones (compare item 77-08 above). CBGraph need to test the Java version for
   rendering diagram nodes since the Swing layout algorithms have been changed.
   This test on the Java version assumed that the Java version string would look like
   "1.7.10.40", i.e. having al least four components. It turns out some some Java
   installation such as the one for Raspbian have short Java version strings,
   such as "1.8.0". This caused the test routine to crash with an array out of bounds
   error. This problem is now resolved.
   (Ticket 216)

77-21 Drag and Drop of Telos sources files and URLs
   If the Options/ShowLineNumbers feature is enabled, then  you can drag and drop
   Telos source files (ending with .sml or .sml.txt) into an empty Telos Editor of CBIva.
   This also works for publicly accessible URLs to such files. 



Detailed Changes since Version 7.6 
==================================

76-01 SET_MODULE_CONTEXT should check READ permission on new module

   The operations of CBserverInterface are checked for permission in the current module.
   However, the operation SET_MODULE_CONTEXT is different in nature. ConceptBase
   now checks whether the user has read permission in the new module
   rather than in the old module. 
   (Ticket 320)

76-02 More flexibility with quotes in CBShell commands

   The CBShell utility allows to process tell/ask commands to be submitted to a CBserver.
   Sometimes, a command argument contains quotes. Then it is useful to have two
   different argument delimiters to enclose arguments that span multiple lines or
   contain special characters. Single quotes like in tell 'Billy end' are now allowed
   as well. CBshell senses the argument delimiter automatically.
   (Ticket 321)

76-03 Initial System database

   The system files are now taken from a pre-fabricated plain database
       $CB_HOME/lib/SystemDB 
   rather than from $CB_HOME/lib/system. This allows to update the SystemDB after
   installation, e.g. to add more graphical types. 
   (Ticket 322)

76-04 More user-friendly commands for CBShell

   A couple of shortcut synonyms for CBShell make it more user-friendly in
   the interactive mode. For example, you can use 'cd' instead of setModule.
   Details are in the user manual.

76-05 Allow small caps variants for ECA operations Tell, Ask, etc.

   The CBShell uses small caps like 'tell' and 'ask' for its operations. In contrast,
   ECArules use capitalized variants like 'Tell' and 'Ask'. It now also allows
   the small caps variants to reduce confusion. 
   (Ticket 323)

76-06 Some deductive predicates were not evaluated correctly

   The evaluation of certain variable-free calls of deductive predicates could
   lead to wrong results because ConceptBase failed to classify the called predicates as
   deductive.
   (Ticket 325)

76-07 False negative warning on stratification warnings

   Under rare circumstances a false warning on a stratification error could be issued.
   This bug is now corrected.

76-08 Crash when constructing an error message

   ConceptBase generates readable representations of formulas that are participating in
   an integrity violation. When a formula is rather complex and has many variables,
   the generation of readable variable names could fail and lead to a crash. This is
   now solved.

76-09 Graphical palette properties

   Like a graphical type, a palette can now have an arbitrary number of string-valued
   properties, using the attribute category palproperty. For example, you can set the
   preferred background color of the graph editor. You can now also set a background
   image for a graph, e.g. for highlighting different layers of a model. 
   (Ticket 326)

76-10 More meaningful graph title

   The window displaying a graph carried the title "localhost:4001", which is not very meaningful.
   Now, the title is combined from the name of the graphical palette (or its longtitle) and
   the name of the module in which the graph editor was started.

76-11 Wrong classification of tautological constraints

   The predicate (x \= y) was incorrectly classified as tautological when x or y was a variable.
   This is now resolved.
   (Ticket 327)

76-12 Many new shapes 

   The graph editor supports more than 10 new shapes like direction signs, folder shapes, etc.

76-13 Resizable nodes

   If a graphical type has a filler for the size property, then nodes using the graphical type
   can be resized. Use filler "resizable" if Java shall determine the initial size.
   The align property for the node label has now new possible values including "top"
   and  "bottom".
   (Ticket 329)

76-14 Support for :(x m/n y):

   The explicated predicate :(x m/n y): is now supported. It allows to check whether x
   has an explicit (stored) attribute with label n and category m to y.
   (Ticket 330)

76-15 CBserver option -new

   The CBserver option -new can be used to create a fresh new database. It will remove an
   existent database before it creates and initialized the new one. Its effect is like
   deleting the database derectory manually before starting the CBserver with the given
   directory name.

76-16 Start gel files with CBGraph

   The graph layout (GEL) files store now all relevant data of a graphical view including 
   background image/color (if applicable) and the connection details to the ConceptBase
   server from which the graphical view was created. You can edit a gel file with the new
   cbgraph command, either online connected to the right CBserver or offline.
   (Ticket 331)

76-17 Change database module in CBGraph

   You can now change the database module of CBGraph at runtime, very similar to the "set module"
   function of CBIva. You can now also call start a CBGraph from CBIva using a deeply nested
   module. Previously, modules nested deeper than level 3 could not be enacted for a CBGraph editor
   when called via CBIva.
   (Ticket 333)

76-18 Saving of graph types always enabled

   The menu item "saving of graph types" of CBGraph is now removed. Instead, we now always
   store the graph types in a GEL file. GEL files without graph types are of little use.

76-19 Materialize module sources in GEL file

   The GEL file can now store the module sources needed for working with the graph. Use
   the command line parameters +r and +w of cbgraph to enable the syncronization of
   module sources in the GEL file with the CBserver.
   (Ticket 332)

76-20 Detect undefined object names in query expressions

   If certain parameters in query expressions like 'Mary' in TopManager[Mary/employee]
   were undefined, then the compilation could run into an infinite loop rather than
   reporting the semantic error. This bug is now solved.
   (Ticket 335)

76-21 Module listings do not include certain query definitions

   If a query class was also instance of MSFOLassertion, then it was blocked from being
   included in a module listing (query listModule). This bug is now removed. 
   (Ticket 336)

76-22 Evaluation of negated predicates faulty for certain ECArules

   ECArules that contained no free variables in the IF-part but a negated ground predicate
   like not (x = y) were not evaluated correctly. This bug is now solved.
   (Ticket 337)

76-23 Slave mode for CBserver

   A CBserver started with option "-sm slave" shall shutdown itself when its last local
   client disconnects from it. Such CBservers are useful for clients that only need a CBserver
   with an empty database. You then do not have to manually shutdown the CBserver when you
   shutdown the clients.

76-24 Edge middle not stable when changing graphical palette

   The "middle point" of an edge is the place where the edge label is displayed.
   The edge will be routed throug this point. The graph editor did slightly shift this
   point whenever the graphical palette is changed. This is annoying when one wants to
   keep a certain layout of the graph. Further, the graph editor did not move the links
   of links whose source or destination were moved. Such links were then dangling until
   they were explicitely moved. Both problems are now solved.
   (Ticket 339)

76-25 Straighten curvy edges

   Edges between nodes can get very curvy when moving nodes. You can now straighten
   such edges by clicking on an incident node of an edge while the "shift" and "control"
   are pressed. The instantiation and specialization links are now a bit thinner in
   the default graphical palette.

76-26 Bug with horizontal/vertical edges

   Horizontal/vertical edge were only partly drawn and almost disappeared, in particular
   the edge head. The problem was that the drawing area for the edge shrinks to a single line
   in such cases. The problem is now solved by extending the "bounding ractangle" of the edge
   shape.
   (Ticket 340)

76-27 Crash of CBserver when a module name starts with a number

   Object names are alphanumeric in ConceptBase. However, when an object name like 4EM
   starting with a number was used as module name, then a crash occurred. This bug is 
   now solved.
   (Ticket 341)

76-28 Square dots on edges without labels only visible when needed

   Edges typically have a label that can be use to drag the edge middle point.
   If this label is an empty string "", then a little square dot is drawn so that you
   can find this middle point. This square dot is no made invisible when no node
   is selected. So, clicking on a node will make all square dots visible. Clicking
   in the background makes them invisible again. The resulting graph is nicer.

76-29 Start a local CBserver from CBGraph when no CBserver is running

   A GEL file may contain module sources that are linked to the graph. The full
   manipulation of the graph requires that CBGraph is connected to CBserver and that
   CBserver has the corresponding object definitions. CBGraph now starts a local
   CBserver (i.e. on localhost) if such a connection to an existing server fails. 
   (Ticket 344)

76-30 Graph types wrong for newly expanded objects of a graph file

   A graph editor started with a GEL file that has a non-default palette
   did not use this palette when expanding existing nodes, e.g. displaying the
   instances of a given class. This is now corrected.
   (Ticket 345)

76-31 Module sources generated by listModule cannot be loaded

   If a module contained meta formulas and normal formulas, then the sources
   extracted via listModule from such a module could under certain circumstances
   not be told to a new CBserver. Apparently, the CBserver was sent to an infinite loop.
   This did only occur if the module contained formulas with many variables.
   The problem should now be fixed.
   (Ticket 346)

76-32 Wrong attributes expanded in CBGraph

   The graph editor could display the wrong attributes when expanding a given attribute category.
   The bug occurred when displaying derived attributes between two objects that also were
   connected by an explicit attribute of another category. Should now be solved.
   (Ticket 347)

76-33 New command "echo -n" for CBShell

   CBShell now supports "echo -n", i.e. printing a string without terminating it with a newline.
   Work similar to the same option for the Unix echo command.

76-34 Frames referring to their own attribute as attribute values

   Telos frames can now directly refer to their attributes as attribute values of their other
   attributes. This feature allows to avoid certain errors when module sources created
   by listModule need to be told to another CBserver.
   (Ticket 350)

76-35 Output redirection with showAnswer

   The CBShell command showAnswer now supports output redirection.

76-36 Bug with listModule resolved

   ConceptBase uses the listModule query to retrieve module sources and store them in CBGraph
   files (*.gel). It could occur that some generated object frames were included in the
   sources, e.g. triggers for meta-level constraints. Such generated objects could afterwards
   not be told to a CBserver, resulting in incomplete databases. This bug is nolw resolved.
   (Ticket 351)

76-37 Empty source files allowed

   You can now tell empty sources files, i.e. source files without any frame. This is
   not a very useful operation as such but empty source filles are for example generated
   from empty modules. They should be loadable via the -load option of the CBserver.

76-38 Query definitions from LPI files belong to the System module

   An LPI file typically contains Prolog code implementing a query or a function. Its signature
   is declared in the LPI file by a 'tell' clause. When the CBserver was loaded from module
   sources via the -load option, these tell clauses were applied to the last module. Hence,
   the queries/functions of the LPI file were only visible in this module and its submodules.
   The definitions should however be global by default and thus placed in the root module
   System. This is now implemented.

76-39 New option +f

  CBGraph has now a new option +f that dumps module sources into separate text files rather than
  only storing them in the GEL file. This option is mostly for debugging.

76-40 Proposition!attribute instead Attribute

  The alias name 'Attribute' for Proposition!attribute is deprecated since it is incompatible with
  the display of attributes in CBGraph. Proposition!attribute is the class that has all attributes
  as (derived) instances, including itself. We also deprecate the aliases 'Single' and 'Necessary'
  for the attribute categories Proposition!single and Proposition!necessary, resp.
  (Ticket 352)

76-41 Designated CBserver administrator

  The administrator of a CBserver is by default the user who started the CBserver. This user
  has the right to shutdown the CBserver. The new option -a allows to designate another
  user as the administrator. This can be useful when the CBserver is started on another 
  machine and with a different user account than on the client machines but still one of
  the client users shall have the right to shutdown the server.
  (Ticket 353)

76-42 Larger Telos Editor window

  The Telos Editor window of CBIva is now larger at the expense of the log window.
  The windows are of course resizable.

76-43 Optional line numbers for Telos Editor

  The Telos Editor in CBIva can display line numbers. This makes error messages
  that refer to line numbers more readable. The display of line numbers is
  controlled via the Options menu of CBIva.
  (Ticket 355)

76-44 Allow classes to be defined after their instances

  The Telos compiler has always been rather flexible with respect to the ordering
  of frames tols in one transaction. For example, one can define an attribute link
  from object x to object y before the frame defining object y. This flexilility
  did however not work for class definitions. If x was declared as instance of
  class c, then c must be defined before, or a frame definition c must occur before
  the frame defining x. This restriction has now been relaxed. The solution will
  also produce more readable error messages than before.
  (Ticket 356)

76-45 Display of Attribute, InstanceOf, IsA with CBGraph

  The ConceptBase server returned aliases Attribute, InstanceOf, IsA for Proposition!attribute,
  Proposition->Proposition, and Proposition=>Proposition. This prevented CBGraph from displaying
  these 3 system objects. The aliases are now no longer used when retrieving objects and
  CBGraph will display them correctly.
  (Ticket 357)

76-46 Trigger pruning for immutable attributes
  There is now a new attribute category 'immutable'. The main effect is that no integrity
  constraint triggers are generated for predicates linked to immutable attributes because
  they do not change. Trigger pruning can be disabled by setting the CBserver parameter -o
  to 3 or lower.
  (Ticket 358)

76-47 Public CBservers
  The CBIva/CBGraph tools now support a variable PublicCBserver that can be set in their
  configuration file .CBjavaInterface. If set, the tools will attempt to connect to the
  public CBserver, in particular when a GEL file is opened with CBGraph. This allows to
  use ConceptBase without installing your own CBserver.
  (Ticket 359)

76-48 New logos for CBIva and CBGraph
  Both Java interfaces got revised logos.

76-49 ConceptBase client for Windows
  The ConceptBase client CBIva and CBGraph will now by default connect to a standard
  public CBserver. The tools are otherwise the same as for the complete installation
  of ConceptBase. Server-side capabilities like adding LPI files or configuring the
  export of views are however inaccessible for the client-only variant of ConceptBase.

76-50 Button for listModule in CBIva
  The button previously used for "load object" in the CBIva toolbar is now used as
  a shortcut for the listModule query. The "Edit" menu still has an entry for
  "load object".

76-51 Change module in Telos-Editor
  The Telos-Editor of CBiva has now an option "Change module" for the right-click popup
  menu. It instructs the CBserver to switch to the module context whose name is selected in
  the text window. The existing methods to change the model context work as before.



Detailed Changes 7.5 vs 7.4
===========================

75-01 Changes with ECArule syntax

   The 'IF NEW' clause is now deprecated. Use 'IFNEW' instead. Further, the action
   clause 'CALL' is deprecated. Use 'Call' instead. There is a new action
   CreateNew that creates a new instance of a given class.





Detailed Changes 7.4 vs 7.3
===========================

74-01 Simpler start scripts

   The ConceptBase installation directory contains new start scripts cbserver,
   cbiva, and cbshell that simplify starting the ConceptBase system.
   (Ticket 302)

74-02 New option -g exit

   The CBserver can now be started with option '-g exit'. This will instruct the CBserver
   to exit immediately after startup. This is useful when one just wants to materialize some
   views or source models from an existing database, i.e. in combination with the options
   -views and -save.

74-03 Desktop integration

   CBiva uses the Java Desktop Integration for calling the default web browser to
   display HTML pages such as the help pages. This option currently only works under
   Windows and Gnome desktop. This restriction affects the help menu of CBiva.

74-04 Calling active rules by queries

   The Ask clause allows to trigger an active rule whenever the specified query is
   called. This feature now also works for queries without parameters. One can even
   declare the active rule to be a query class (use YesClass as range) and then
   trigger the active rule by 'asking' it.

74-05 Compatibility with SWI-Prolog 6.x

   The CBserver is now compatible with SWI-Prolog 6.x. The index/1 clause had to be disabled
   though since it is no longer supported by SWI-Prolog. The compatibility only concerns
   those of you who want to compile ConceptBase from its sources.

74-06 Classifying recursive predicates

   The ECA query evaluator checks wether any predicate in the condition is recursive. If so,
   it will employ tabling for the correct and safe evaluation. The classification was however
   not capturing recursing via nested query or function expressions. We now use tabling
   also in these cases to be on the safe side.
   (Ticket 306)

74-07 CBshell positional parameters

   The CBshell nows supports positional parameters such as $0, $1 etc. The parameters
   can occur in the shell scripts and are replaced by the actual parameters at runtime.
   This improves the usability of the CBshell in an application with scripts.
   (Ticket 307)

74-08 New trace mode 'silent' 

   The new trace mode 'silent' supresses all console output of a CBserver, including the
   'ready'  message that reports the CBserver to be ready to accept IP requests.
   Useful if one wants to redirect standard output of a CBshell process.

74-09 Retell and active rules

   The Retell operation failed under certain conditions to work correctly with active rules.
   This bug has now been removed.
   (Ticket 309)

74-10 Improved shell integration

   CBshell has two new options. The option -q enables the replacement of single quotes by
   escaped double quotes. This provides more flexibility in call CBshell scripts from 
   regular scripts and passing arguments to it. The second option -p allows to use the
   CBshell in a Unix pipe, i.e. it processes commands generated by a preceding program.
   For example, the generator could analyze Java programs and store facts about the
   analysis in ConceptBase, e.g. import facts forming a dependency graph.
   (Ticket 310)

74-11 Tokenizing 'this' variable

   The tokenizer for logical expressions failed to correctly recognize the 'this' variable
   under certain rare circumstances. This bug is now resolved.
   (Ticket 311)

74-12 Compatibility with SWI-Prolog 6.0

   Some minor issues preventing compatibility with SWI-Prolog 6.0 are now solved.
   This is only of concern for users who want to compile the ConceptBase sources. 

74-13 Help menu with pointers to tutorials

   Besides the user manual and the CB-Forum, the 'Help' menu now includes links
   to the ConceptBase Tutorials. This allows user to directly exercise by
   following the instructions in the tutorials.

74-14 Anti-aliasing to smoothen lines in the graph editor

   Line shapes of nodes and edges are now drawn with anti-aliasing enabled
   (Graphics2D in Java). This results is smoother and clearer lines. 
   If a selected node is moved, anti-aliasing is switched off to allow
   faster response to mouse  movements. Realeasing the mouse button
   re-enables anti aliasing.

74-15 Anonymous edge labels in the graph editor

   Certain edge labels like those for instantiations and specializations
   are not drawn as a string (edgelabel=""). The little square dot used
   to be drawn in edgecolor and with a fixed dimension of 6x6 pixels.
   Now, the dimension is dependent on the edgewidth and the color of the
   square dot is the bgcolor of the edge, if defined. Otherwise, the edgecolor
   is taken.

74-16 Edge head dimension

   The edge head in the graph editor is displayed as an arrow. The dimensions were
   suitable for edges with a width of 3 pixels. Narrower edges got a rather large arrow,
   while very thick edges made the arrow invisible bacause it was inside the edge
   stroke. Now, the arrow dimension is transformed to fit the edge width. Edges
   with width smaller or equal than 2 pixels get a vee-shaped arrow head.

74-17 Nodes with labels in italics

   If a node label in italics style ended with certain characters like "y", then
   part of the last character was not displayed due to some node border. Such
   node are now 4 pixels wider to ensure that the label is completely visible.

74-18 Explicit instantiation predicates in meta formulas

   A predicate occurrence like :(x in c):  with variable c in a formula now
   qualifies it as a meta formula. This allows to use the partial evaluator
   for meta formulas also for the explicit variants of the In-predicate.
   (Ticket 314)

74-19 False error messages on missing objects removed

   Certain formulas where a variable type is followed by an pening bracket could
   lead to error message obour missing object definitions even though ConceptBase
   compiled the formula correctly. The reason was that such expressions could
   be parsed both as a function call and as a variable type followed by a subformula.
   This is now resulved by disallowing function calls like F(a) as variable types.
   Use F[a/param] if you need it as a variable type like in forall x/F[a/param].
   (Ticket 316)

74-20 ECArules without IF-part

   Leaving out the IF-part in an ECArule is equivalent to the trivial IF-part
     IF TRUE
   (Ticket 317)

74-21 postExport command sharted with sh under Linux/Unix

   ConceptBase has the ability to materialize query results in the file system
   of the CBserver, see option -views. If the specified directory conatins a
   command file postExport.sh under Unix/Linux, this shall be executed when
   the views are materialized. We now do this by a call 'sh postExport.sh'.
   By this, no execute flag has to be set on the postExport.sh file.

74-22 Retell actions of ECArules checked against integrity constraints

   If ECArules would cause both Untell and Tell updates to the database in a 
   single transaction that violates some integrity constraints, then the effect
   of the transaction was not completely reverted. This bug is now fixed.
   (Ticket 318)

74-23 Nonpersistent databases

   If the update mode is set to 'nonpersistent' the ConceptBase will surpress
   to write them on the (temporary) database file. This speeds up update
   operations in this mode.
   (Ticket 319)
  



Detailed Changes 7.3 vs 7.2
===========================

73-01 Better choice of E-predicate for meta formulas

   A couple of problems showed up when trying out a meta formula that defines
   disjointness of class extensions. One effect was the selection of a bad
   E-predicate, leading to an explosion of generated formulas.
   (Tickets 264,273)

73-02 Problems with meta formulas resolved

   Under certain conditions variables in meta formulas were replaced by constants
   leading to a fatal crash. There was a bug caused by changing (x \= y) into its
   opposite (x=y). 
   The meta formula compiler now prunes generated constraints that are always
   true. This leads to leaner and more efficient Datalog code.
   (Tickets 265,266)

73-03 Evaluate ground predicates in formulas generated from meta formulas

   The partial evaluation of the meta formula compiler replaces some predicates by
   ground predicates, i.e. all parameters are constants (basically object identifiers).
   Some of these predicates are now evaluated against the current database and
   replaced by TRUE or FALSE depending on the evaluation.
   This removes in particular redundant true predicates such as In(Employee,EntityType).
   (Ticket 267)

73-04 Issue with string buffer on Linux64

   ConceptBase uses a dynamic string buffer data structure to construct a textual
   answer to a query. The disposal of the memory allocated for such buffers
   sometimes led to a double disposal error from libc, resultung in a fatal crash.
   The problem only occurred under Linux64 and only under certain circumstances.
   We changed the default buffer size from 1000 to 1024, which appears to solve
   the problem. 
   (Ticket 263)

73-05 Checking parameterized answer formats

   The ConceptBase graph editor uses parameterized answer formats for communicating
   to the CBserver. If the 'palette' argument is undefined, then the CBserver
   could crash. We now check the existence of the parameters in the database.
   (Ticket 268)

73-06 Compatibility with SWI-Prolog 5.10.2

   The latest official release of SWI-Prolog disallows quantified variables in the
   2nd argument of findall. We now use save_setof instead to stay compatible with
   SWI-Prolog 5.10.x.

73-07 Better rules for assigning labels to generated formulas

   If a metaformula is partially evaluated to several generated formulas that
   are assigned to classes that stand in a subclass relationship, it could happen that
   ConceptBase would use the same attribute label to attach the generated formulas
   to those classes. That would then trigger an integrity violation (ISA axiom).
   We now regard subclasses when creating the attribute labels. There is also
   a new CBserver option -rl that can be set to 'off' in order to generate 100% safe
   attribute labels that are however less readable.
   (Ticket 271)

73-08 Attribution predicates whose first argument is defined as x/VAR

   If a variable in a formula is defined as x/VAR, then an attribution predicate
   (x m y) occuring in the same formula could not be processed. In fact, it caused
   ConceptBase to crash. We now use Proposition as the range, replacing VAR, to
   compile the attribution predicate (x m y).
   (Ticket 272)

73-09 Loading LPI plugins under Windows

   A problem with resolving file path expressions caused Windows not to load local
   LPI plugins (copied to a database directory). The bug is now fixed.
   (Ticket 262)

73-10 Online user manual updated for version 7.3

   The online (HTML) user manual of ConceptBase is updated to version 7.3.
   The online user manual is accessible via the help function of CBiva.
   Under Java6 and Linux, the help pages are displayed with the default
   web browser. Otherwise, we use the Java builtin HTML capabilities.

73-11 New builtin query listModule

   The new builtin query listModule will list the content of the specified
   module (default: the current module). It makes the plug-in
   listmodule.swi.lpi obsolete.

73-12 Server-side save & load of module sources

   The CBserver has two new command line options -save and -load that
   allow to export/import the sources of all modules in the database.
   This improves the reliability of the model management by ConceptBase.
   The sources can also be manually edited by an offline text editor.
   (Ticket 274)

73-13 User names with special characters

   Users enrolling to a CBserver should have alphanumeric usernames without special
   characters such as ' ' or '-'. ConceptBase will replace internally some
   of the special characters by '_' but that is potentially an unsafe method.

73-14 Materializing query results

   The CBserver parameter -views enables the automated materialization of query
   results for all modules that list the queries to be materialized in the
   saveView attribute of the respective module object. The materialization
   takes place at the same events as for the saving of module sources.
   (Ticket 275)

73-15 Non-default parameters accessible in answer formats

   The CBserver command line option that deviate from their default are
   now available in answer formats. For example, the directory specified
   for the -views option can be accessed in answer formats as {viewDir}.

73-16 ALPHANUM conversion in answer formats

   The function ALPHANUM for answer formats converts strings into a 
   canonical form only containing alphanumeric characters. This is is useful
   when the output format disallows special characters at certain positions.

73-17 Post-export command

   The CBserver will execute the command file postExport.sh (postExport.bat)
   in the -views directory if such a command file exists. This is useful
   for postprocessing the materialized query results.
   (Ticket 275)

73-18 Issue with Label predicate in meta formulas

   The full introduction of the (x m/n y) by ticket 164 discontinued the use
   of Label(x,m) with variable m as criterion for a meta formula. This rendered
   certain meta formulas as faulty. We now perform an auxiliary partial
   evaluation to allow those patterns again. As a side effect, the materialization
   meta model of the Method Engineering textbook compiles fine again.
   (Tickets 276,283)

73-19 Improvements for string manipulations

   The string function ConcatenateStrings will now accept ordinary objects
   and expressions.So, ConcatenateStrings("abc",100+23) will return "abc123".
   StringToLabel also accepts functional expressions as argument. For example,
   StringToLabel(ConcatenateStrings("abc",123)) returns abc123 (without
   creating abc123 as object). A new function toLabel converts an expression
   to an alphanumeric label and creates an individual object with the label.

73-20 Calling builtin queries via the Telos editor

   A missing treatment of the default answer format had disabled the call
   of builtin query classes such as get_object via the Telos editor.
   This is now enabled again.

73-21 Bug for database initialization tool removed

   The development environment of ConceptBase includes a transformSML0 utility
   that initializes the database files with system objects. That utility
   had a bug that caused a buffer overflow on Linux64. This bug is now
   removed. The runtime of ConceptBase is not directly affected since
   it works on pre-installed database files.
   (Ticket 223)

73-22 Explicit instances of query classes

   All instances of query classes are derived. ConceptBase did however not prevent
   telling explicit instances to query classes. This is now resolved.
   An error is raised on attempts to create an instance of a query class.
   (Ticket 277)

73-23 Sub-transactions in ECA rules

   The action 'tBegin' starts a kind of sub-transaction within ECA rules.
   It provides another powerful mechanism to control the execution order
   of ECA triggers. We also provide the constructs TRANSACTIONAL and
   FOR <queue>  in ON-parts of ECArules.
   (Tickets 250,278,279)

73-24 Select expressions in answer formats

   Select expressions can occur in answer formats. If the same expression
   like bill!billsname was independently defined in two modules A&B, then
   ConceptBase would resolve to the solution of the expression in module A
   even though the current module context was B. This bug is now fixed.
   (Ticket 281)

73-25 Exploit functional dependencies

   Certain predicates like From(a,x) have a unique solution for x when a
   is a constant (an object identifier). Then, we can evaluate the predicate
   and replace the variable x by its value. 
   (Ticket 283)

73-26 Meta formulas compiled differently depending on TELL order

   The fact whether the meta formula was told in a separate transaction as the
   objects that instantiate it, or in the same transaction, had an
   influence on the generated code. If it was told in the same transaction,
   then less redundant predicates were removed. This cosmetic issue is now
   fixed for most cases.
   (Ticket 284)

73-27 Forgotten variables in generated formula

   Some formulas generated for meta formulas have missing variables.
   This occurred when the "range predicate" for the variable is
   removed due to optimization. We now assign the default range
   (x in Proposition) in such cases to generate syntactically correct code.
   (Ticket 285)

73-28 EvenOdd problem

   The recursive definition of even and odd numbers is characterized by two
   rules that call the other rule, respectively. When such a definition
   was based on another set of recursive rules (defining integer numbers),
   then ConceptBase did not compute Even and Odd correctly. The problem
   is now solved.
   (Ticket 286)

73-29 Recursive functions

   Functions deliver at most one value per input value tuple. Hence, if we
   find the first value, we can stop searching for further values. This
   slightly improves the performance of recursive function definitions.
   We also remove domain predicates from the function body if they are
   redundant to the expressions that compute the function result.
   Two new pattern, R33 and P1, are included in the semantic optimizer to
   remove the redundant predicates.
   (Ticket 290)

73-30 Slow query calls in presence of ECA rules

   If the database contains ECA rules, then there was a noticable delay per query
   call, in particular for checking whether a query call matches the ON
   part of an ECA rule. This is now solved.
   (Ticket 291)

73-31 Optimized conditions of ECA rules

   ConceptBase now uses several heuristcs to re-order the predicates in conditions
   of ECArules. The heuristics only apply if the conditions consists of a conjunction
   of predicates that all refer to the same database state. The performance gain
   can be orders of magnitude depending on the database size and the number of ECArules.
   (Ticket 292)

73-32 Check use of reserved words in formulas

   Labels line 'in', 'isA', 'new' are reserved words in formulas and may not be used
   as valiable labels. This is now checked and violations are reported.
   (Ticket 293)

73-33 Check wellformed ECArules

   The tests on wellformedness of ECArules were rather incomplete. We now enforce
   a couple of wellformedness rules. In particular object labels must refer to
   existing objects.
   (Ticket 294)

73-34 IF-NEW clause in ECArules

   Instead of tagging each condition predicate by ` (or 'new'), it is now possible to
   use a clause 'IF NEW' in place of 'IF'. Hence,
        IF NEW lit1 and lit2 
   is the same as
        IF `lit1 and `lit2
   (Ticket 295)

73-35 Report slow ECArules

   ConceptBase report slow executions of ECArules in trace mode 'veryhigh'. The threshold
   is 0.25 sec for a single evaluation of the IF-part (and/or DO-part). The slow
   ECArules are displayed on standard output in the format
       ECAruleManager: Slow ECArule <name-of-rule>: XXX sec needed ...
   If your ECArules are reported slow, you might consider to set the CBserver option
   -eca unsafe. 

73-35 Cascading UNTELL

   ConceptBase now also generates events for deleting objects from the builtin classes
   Individual and Attribute. This allows to write ECArules that realize cascading
   deletion, i.e. that remove all links to/from an object when the the object
   itself is deleted.
   (Ticket 296)

73-36 Display Functions

   The CBiva user interface now features a new menu item Browse/Display Functions.
   It lists all functions defined in the currebt database. Previously, functions
   had been subsumed under Browse/Display Queries. This menu item now lists only
   proper queries. The split should make it easier to locate queries and functions.
   (Ticket 297)

73-36 Help Menu of CBiva

   There is a new link 'CB-Forum' in the Help menu of CBiva that point to the
   Web address of the ConceptBase Forum. CBiva will now use the standard web 
   browser for the Help function 'ConceptBase.cc Manual' and 'CB-Forum' also
   under Windows if the Java version is 1.6

73-37 Retell on (x m/n y)

   The ECA Retell action can now also be applied on the qualified attribution
   predicate (x m/n y). It will untell an existing attribute with label n and 
   attribute n of object x, and then tell the new fact.
   (Ticket 298)

73-38 New default security level

   The support for cascading UNTELL can easily delete the whole object
   base when system objects like Class or Proposition are deleted. To prevent
   this undesired behavior, the default security level is set to '1' (UNTELL can only
   delete objects defined in the current module). In mode '2', updates
   to the System module are forbidden and ConceptBase checks the CB_Permitted
   query to authorize access to modules below and including oHome.
   (Ticket 299,300)

73-39 Word wrapping in log window

   The log window of CBiva now uses word wrapping instead of charachter wrapping.
   The log windows is mainly used to display error messages. They are now easier
   to read.

73-40 Dropping redundant formulas

   Certain formulas do not contribute to the extension of any predicate. For example,
   a constraint that is always true is redundant. Moreover a rule, whose condition is
   always false can be dropped.
   (Ticket 301)

73-41 The tag -f can be omitted when calling CBshell script files

   The command "CBshell scriptFile" is now equivalent to "CBshell -f scriptFile".





Detailed Changes 7.2 vs 7.1
===========================


72-01 Bug with optimization of From/To resolved

  The semantic optimizer had a faulty rule for dealing with From/To predicates.
  It could lead under certain circumstances to a crash of the system. This is
  now resolved
  (Ticket 180)

72-02 Parameter values created as objects

  If a query is called with a value (a number or a string) as a parameter, then
  ConceptBase will first create the value as an instance of its type (Integer,
  Real, String) before evaluating the query. This allows to formulate more
  easily query calls involving values.
  (Ticket 181)

72-03 ASKquery with more than one parameter in answer formats

  The ASKquery function for answer formats could only support queries 
  with a single argument. This restriction is now lifted.
  (Ticket 182)

72-04 CBshell can be used in shell pipes

  The CBserver shall now be silent on stdout when the tracemode is set to 'no'.
  This allows the use of CBshell as a filter in Unix pipes. For example, one can
  let ConceptBase generate some XML output and have it automatically passed to
  a subsequent post-processor. Another example is the generation of GraphViz
  specifications (graph layouts).
  (Ticket 183)

72-05 Print source & destination of elements in answer formats

  The answer transformer can now print the source and destination of an answer element, 
  e.g. {From(x)}, {To(x)} much like for the ASKquery construct. It simplifies
  answer formatting where answer elements are attributes. ConceptBase also supports
  the patterns {Oid(x)} and {Label(x)}. 
  (Ticket 184)

72-06 Function patterns protected against calls to undefined procedures

   Answer formats may contain so-called function patterns like {F(x)}. If the
   function F was undefined, ConceptBase crashed. This is now resolved.

72-07 Problems with certain query constraints resolved

   Certain queries with parameters that use an equality predicate in their constraint
   could cause a fatal crash. This is now solved.
   (Ticket 185)

72-08 Alias for command line parameter -p

   The CBserver script now support -port as an alias for the -p option. The -p option
   continues to be supported. The label -port avoids a minor conflict with the
   underlying SWI-Prolog shell.

72-09 Improved performance for loading Telos models with many formulas

   The efficiency of the parser and integrity checker has been improved for large Telos
   models with many rules and constraints (in the range of thousands of formulas).
   Thanks go to Simone Ludwig for pointing us to the issue.
   (Ticket 186) 

72-10 More efficient implementation of (x m/l y)

   The predicate (x m/l y) a.k.a AL(x,ml,l,y)  is now implemented more efficiently. It is about
   10% faster for small databases and up to 10 times faster for larger databases.
   As a side-effect, the COUNT_Attribute query enjoys the same speed-up.
   The object store now exports a new predicate Attr_s upon which the COUNT_Attribute function
   is defined. The new predicate further improves the performance of COUNT_Attribute by roughly 10%.
   Thanks go to Simone Ludwig for pointing us to the issue.
   (Tickets 164,187,188)

72-11 Window dimensions adapted for netbooks

   The initial dimensions of the CBiva and GraphEditor windows have been slightly reduced
   to better support the smaller screen sizes of netbooks (1024x600).

72-12 Spelling errors in variable types handled correctly again

   A spelling error on a variable type declaration such as 'x/Typo' could crash a CBserver.
   The bug was introduced into ConceptBase 7.1.x. The system is now handling such errors
   correctly again.

   (Ticket 189)

72-13 New patterns {currentmodule} and {currentpath} for answer formats

   Two new patterns have been defined for answer formats. The pattern {currentmodule} is
   expanded to the name of the module to which the CBserver is set while answering the query.
   The pattern {currentpath} is similar but is expanded to the whole module path starting from
   the root module System.

72-14 Generated formulas re-used in subsequent TELLs

   If one fetches a class that contains a generated formula (generated from a meta formula),
   then a subsequent TELL would generate a copy of the generated formula. This redudant copy
   is now avoided.
   (Ticket 191)

72-15 Better re-use of answers to queries

   The re-use capability of answers to queries has been improved for the case that queries are
   called inside so-called answer formats.
   (Ticket 192)

72-16 Reified query calls

   Query calls such as Q[x/p] can now be stored as instances of the predefined class QueryCall.
   One can then ask for instances of this query call object. It will be answered calling the
   respective query. The purpose of this construct is to pre-define some query calls for later use.
   It also provides for a better support of parameterized query calls in the graph editor.
   (Ticket 194)

72-17 Module paths

   The set-module directive in Telos model files now supports module paths such as System-M1-M11.
   This feature allows to load a Telos model file directly into a deeply nested sub-module.
   (Ticket 196)

72-18 Bug with string buffers

   The memory de-allocation of string buffers had a flaw that is now resolved.
   (Ticket 198)

72-19 Hide internal query classes

   ConceptBase has quite a long list of pre-defined query classes used for internal purposes,
   in particular for the interaction between the user interface and the CBserver. These
   query classes are now hidden from the Display Queries dialog of CBiva. They still can
   be listed by the Display Instances dialog (with QueryClass as class).
   (Ticket 200)

72-20 Generalized implementation of attribution predicate (x m y)

   The attribute predicate (x m y) (resp (x m/n y) can either be based on explicit attributes
   and their (explicit) instantiation to attribute categories, or be derived by deductive rules.
   The case that the instantiation of an explicit attribute (label n) to its category 
   (label m) is derived via a deductive rule is now added. This makes the attribution predicate
   more flexible.
   (Ticket 202)

72-21 Improved support for explicit attribution A_e(x,m,y)

   The definition of A_e has been extended to also support cases in which the attribute 
   is explicit but the instantiation to the attribute category m is derived. Internally, the
   A_e predicate is compiled into a more efficient form similar to the internal form of
   the regular attribution predicate A. In certain cases, e.g. when an attribute is declared
   to be symmetric and transitive, the clever use of A_e yields code that is about 100.000 times
   faster than the code that just uses the regular attribute predicate A. 
   (Tickets 203,207)

72-22 Double display of retrieved attributes

   Under certain conditions, a retrieved attribute could show up twice in an answer. The reason
   was a redundant defintion of a clause for the attribution predicates A and A_e. The
   bug is now removed.
   (Ticket 208)

72-23 Genuine support for (x m/l y)
  
   The object store now genuinely supports the AL predicate (x m/l y). This support makes certain
   queries like COUNT_Attribute up to 30% faster. 
   (Ticket 187)

72-24 Genuine support for Ai(x,m,id)
 
   The object store now also genuinely supports the Ai predicate, leading to minor efficiency gains
   as this predicate is rarely used.
   (Tickets 211,212)

72-25 Generate code avoids object names

   The code generated for formulas is now avoiding object names whereever possible. Instead, it uses
   object identifiers. The only exceptions are the predicates Label(x,n) and AL(x,m,y,n) where n is
   a constant. The benefit of this change is that object names can now be changed without having to change
   the generated code. Besides, the rule evaluation is slightly faster.
   (Ticket 195)72-64 Dynamic activation and de-activation of ECArules

72-26 Query calls with uppercase parameter labels caused problems

   A query call like Q[v/A] where A is an uppercase label could cause problems. This bug is now resolved.
   (Ticket 214)

72-27 Avoid double evaluation of certain deduced predicates

   The "magic cache" predicate evaluator of ConceptBase transduces the Prolog-style top-down
   evaluation of (recursive) predicates into an iterative evaluation where partial solutions
   are stored in so-called cache slots. The inner loop of the iteration method has to
   evaluate certain predicates twice in order to check that no more facts can be derived. This
   double evaluation can be avoided for non-recursive predicate calls, leading to a higher
   performance in such cases. Since most predicate calls are not based on deductive rules,
   this optimization only slightly improves the overall performance, i.e. around 5%.
   (Ticket 213)

72-28 Some new icons for the graph editor

   The graph editor has new icons for the operations 'hide selected objects', 'load object', and
   'show the links'. The new icons should improve the intuitive understanding of the operations.

72-29 New tutorial on meta modeling

   The directory doc/Tutorial now contains cbTutorial2.pdf, a tutorial on using ConceptBase
   for meta modeling.

72-30 Use UTC/GMT time also for CBIva

   The time displayed in the CBIva status bar is now using UTC (=GMT=Grenwhich Mean Time)
   as timezone just like the CBserver does since long. 

72-31 C++ sources compatible with gcc 4.3

   The C++ sources of the CBserver can now be compiled with gcc 4.3 (largely compliant to ISO C-99).
   This allows to support more reliably future platforms.
   (Ticket 218)

72-32 Avoid deprecated string conversions

   The C sources now avoid largely unsafe conversions of string constants that could lead to
   dynamic changes of string constants.
   (Ticket 219)

72-33 Infix syntax for A_e, In_e, Isa_e

   The three 'extensional' predicates now have an infox syntax as well. For example,
   :(x in C): stands for In_e(x,C) (=explicit instance of C).
   (Ticket 220)

72-34 startCBserver script now accepts parameters

   The script startCBserver (.sh for Unix/Linux, .bat for Windows) now accepts the CBserver parameters.
   Before, it forcefully set the parameter UpdateMode to persistent and used defaults for all other
   parameters. The revision now allows to use startCBserver as standard script to start the CBserver,
   hiding the details of the internal script bin/CBserver, which continues to be supported.
   As part of the revision, the default rules for the parameter UpdateMode (-u) have changed.
   If a database is provided (-d), then the default update mode is persistent, otherwise it
   is nonpersistent.
   (Ticket 221)

72-35 ConceptBase is now under a FreeBSD-style license

   A registration key is no longer required. Moreover, we will make open the source code of ConceptBase.
   The FreeBSD-style license keeps the copyright with the ConceptBase Team but allows you to 
   use the system in both academic and commercial settings. 

72-36 Circumvene problem with newest Java6 JRE

   The Java 6 JREs after Update 11 are not fully compatible to the Java code of the
   ConceptBase graph browser. To circumvene the problem, the start scripts now look for
   a Java5 (or Java 6 Update 7) JRE on the local computer. This is not solving the
   issue but it allows you to install an older Java JRE like Java 5 Update 18 or Java6 Update 7
   on your local computer in parallel to the most recent Java JRE. ConceptBase will then
   find the compatible JRE.
   (Ticket 216)

72-37 Allow umlauts and other accented characters in assertions

   Characters like umlauts and characters with accents are now also allowed as object labels
   in assertions (rules and constraints). They were allowed since long as objects labels in frames.
   (Ticket 222)

72-38 More readable attribute labels for some generated formulas

   Formulas generated from meta formulas are attached as attributes of suitable classes. 
   ConceptBase tries to create a readable label for that attribute. The method has now
   been extended to cover more cases. An example is InverseOf.sml from the CB-Forum.

72-39 Standard start scripts

   The user manual and installation guide now only document the new startCB* scripts
   rather than the older scripts in the bin directory. The latter remain fully functional.
   The new scripts require zero installation effort.

72-40 List module content as frames

   There is now a CBserver plugin 'listmodule' that can be used to show the content of
   the current module as Telos frames. The plugin is available from the subdirectory
   ConceptBase:Software of the CB-Forum. It can either be added permanently to the CBserver
   or to selected databases.
   (Ticket 197)

72-41 oHome is default module instead System

   Clients are now assigned by default to the home module oHome, which is a direct
   sub-module of the root module 'System'. This allows to protect system objects
   from accidential removal. 
   (Ticket 224)

72-42 Untelling non-existing objects

   Untelling non-existing objects no longer crashes the CBserver. 
   (Ticket 225)

72-43 Unknown objects in predicates

   The tests for unknown object references in predicates have been extended to cover new
   cases. This avoids certain crashes of the CBserver.
   (Ticket 189)

72-44 Support for file type .txt

   CBiva now supports .txt as file type for Telos model files. The old file type .sml is supported
   as well. This allows to edit Telos model files more conveniently with plain text editors.
   (Ticket 226)

72-45 Bug with object denotations solved

   Complex object denotations like (x->c)!attr were not supported by the graph editor. This limitation
   has now been lifted. Denotations of instantiation/specialization objects are now consistently put
   into parantheses.
   (Tickets 227,229)

72-46 Negated predicates in meta formulas

   The partial evaluator could not process certain meta formulas containing negated predicates.
   The respective cases can now be handled. Still, the partial evaluator is not yet complete.
   (Ticket 230)

72-47 Asking classes like queries

   Asking a query returns all its derived instances. Now you can also ask an ordinary class and
   will receive all its instances. Technically, asking a class c is mapped to asking the query
   find_instances[c/class]. Note that some instances of c may be inherited or derived by rules.
   If one specifies a query call in the TelosEditor window and then presses the ASK button, then
   it will be converted to a regular query call instead of an ASK FRAME. This makes the ASK button
   of CBiva more flexible.
   (Tickets 231,232)

72-48 Allow function shortcuts and arithmetic expressions in ASK calls

   The ASK interface of the CBserver now also supports function shortcuts like COUNT(Class) and
   arithmetic expressions like 100*COUNT(Class)+1. This makes the interaction with functions
   and arithmetic expressions easier and more natural. The answer format for query calls
   submitted via the ASK button is set to 'default'. If the query call is a function call, the
   'default' is interpreted as 'LABEL' by the CBserver, otherwise it is interpreted as 'FRAME'. 
   (Ticket 234)

72-49 Performance improvements for active rules

   The evaluation of active rules is rather slow. This can be an issue if an event (indirectly)
   leads to many rule triggerings. By several small changes the overall performance of
   active rule evaluations has been improved by about 25%. This is still rather slow however.
   (Ticket 237)

72-50 Initial graphical palette

   When the graph editor is started, the graphical palette to be used is initially set to a
   user-defined palette (if existent) rather than the DefaultJavaPalette. If there exists a
   user-defined palette, then this is more likely to be used than the default palette.

72-51 New edge style "dashdotted"

   The graph editor supports the new edge style "dashdotted" for links. 

72-52 Interaction of graph editor with CBserver now faster

   The graph editor interacts with the server to compute the graphical types of
   nodes & links, and to compute the ingoing and outgoing links, including derived
   links. The latter operation is now faster. In particular, changing the graphical
   palette is now faster due to shorter response times of the CBserver. 
   The computation of the graphical types is still rather expensive if the
   graphical palette has many graphical types with complex membership rules.

72-53 Concerned class of predicates also derived from subclasses

   Attribution predicates (x m y) are compiled into an internal form Adot(id,x,y)
   where id is the identifier of the most specific attribute of a class of x
   that has the label m. Up to now, ConceptBase searched along the superclass hierarchy,
   i.e. the direct class(es) of x and its superclasses. However, if there is no such
   attribute in the superclass hierarchy, then one can also take the subclass hierarchy and
   select the most general subclass of the class of x that defines an attribute with
   label m. In this case, instances of that subclass can provide solutions for
   Adot(id,x,y). Instances of classes that do not define an attribute with label m will
   anyway not provide solutions for Adot(id,x,y). We support now this extension when
   CBserver option " -cc extended" is selected, but require that there is a single such
   subclass (rather than a hierarchy) for the sake of simple computation. The new feature
   will allow more occurrences of (x m y) to be compiled to their internal form Adot(id,x,y).
   In rules/integrity constraints, this compilatation is mandatory. For queries,
   the predicate (x m y) was left unchanged when no concerned class (id) was found.
   This catchall case remains active. Their are just now fewer cases where it is needed.
   See test script ticket242.cbs for more details.
   (Ticket 242)

72-54 Operator "not" had wrong priority in ECA conditions

   The logical operator "not" had weaker priority in ECA conditions than "and" & "or".
   This lead to wrong code generated for expressions like "not lit1 and lit2". The
   bug is now fixed.
   (Ticket 243)

72-55 Execution semantics of ECA 

   The ECA mode ImmediateDeferred was unable to deal correctly with cases where
   the condition of an ECArule has multiple solutions, each triggerung the execution
   of the DO-part. We now generate the actions immediately when an update occurs and
   put all such actions on the waiting queue for the deferred execution. Besides,
   the tracing of ECArules has been considerably improved.
   A bug with the mode Immediate was also solved, leading as a side effect to a 
   smaller list of generated events. This also improved performance in all ECA modes by 
   around 5%.
   (Tickets 244,245)

72-56 Avoid phantom parser error messages

   The syntax rules for rules and constraints have been optimized to avoid backtracking.
   This eliminates many "phantom" error messages about undefined objects, where 
   a predicate label was tested as object name.
   (Ticket 206)

72-57 More powerful meta formula compiler

   The meta formula compiler uses a cost model to find the best strategy to compile
   a meta formula. The old cost model excluded some relatively simple meta formulas.
   There also were some bugs when recursive rules needed to be evaluated during the
   compilation of a meta formula. The cost model is now more flexible extending
   the set of meta formulas that can be compiled. There are also two new command
   line parameters -pl (maximum path length) and -mc (maximum cost) that can
   be used to either limit or extend the search space of the meta formula compiler.
   (Ticket 246)

72-58 Better support for telling attributes in ECA rules

   If ConceptBase cannot find a class defining the attribute refferred to in an
   ECA action  "Tell (x m y)" or "Tell (x m/n y)" at compile time, then this check
   is delayed to the runtime. This makes adding attributes to new created objects
   easier. There is also a new builtin ECA action "newLabel" to create new object names.
   (Ticket 247)


72-59 Predicate `(x m y) in ECA conditions rectified

   The predicate `(x m y)  (= solutions to (x m y) based on the newest database state)
   did only return the first solution. This bug has been corrected.
   (Ticket 248) 

72-60 Issue with true/false in IF-parts of ECArules

   If the IF-part of an ECArule merely consists of TRUE (or FALSE) and the mode
   of the ECArule is ImmediateDeferred, then it is not correctly evaluated. This
   bug is now fixed.
   (Ticket 251)

72-61 Untell events to propagated to superclasses

   Untelling an object of a subclass implicitely untells the object from the
   superclass. This event was not always detected for certain ECArules. This has
   been fixed now. It should be noted that implicit removals (additions) via 
   deductive rules are not handled by the ECA component. The support of 
   instance inheritance is a "comfort" function.
   (Ticket 252)

72-62 Safe evaluation of recursive predicates in ECA rules

   A recursive predicate `pred  in the IF-part of an ECArule could lead to
   an infinite loop. This is now safe-guarded. The new CBserver parameter -eca
   controls the safe-guarding since it is a relatively costly function.
   (Ticket 253)

72-63 Nonnumerical function expressions

   The equality predicate (x=y) now also support the case where x or y is not 
   a number. This is achieved by internally using the EQ predicate rather the
   legacy predicate UNIFIES.

72-64 Dynamic activation and de-activation of ECArules

   ECArules have an attribute 'active', which can be set to FALSE to de-activate
   the rule and to TRUE to re-activate it. Now, you can even dynamically change
   this attribute via other ECArules. This allows you to create different
   working sets of active ECArules depending on the current database state. 
   (Ticket 255)

72-65 Loading of plugins improved

   The loading of CBserver plugins (*.lpi files) has been improved. The
   CBserver now reports at startup, which plugins have been loaded.
   Moreover, error messages are created if the loading fails, e.g. due
   to syntax errors. A collection of plugins is provided in the CB-Forum at
     http://merkur.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/pub/bscw.cgi/2768063
   Note that plugins are copyrighted and typically come with their
   own license model.

72-66 Replace SYSTEM.SWI.builtin by SystemBuiltin.pro

   The file SYSTEM.SWI.builtin used to be added to each new ConceptBase database.
   It contains the implementation of the builtin query classes and functions. 
   The code is now moved to a regular CBserver module SystemBuiltin.pro.
   This makes the software easier to maintain.
   (Ticket 256)

72-67 Bug with compiling system classes resolved

   Some optimizations to the CBserver code made it impossible to compile
   the ConceptBase builtin classes. This only affects users with access to the
   ConceptBase source code. The bug has been removed.
   (Ticket 259)

72-68 New 'Raise' action for ECArules

   The 'Raise' action for ECArules can be used to generate Ask events inside the
   DO/ELSE part of ECArules. 
   (Ticket 260)

72-69 Issue with long ECA trigger chains solved

   Cascading ECArule triggerings caused by ECA actions that match ECA events can
   run for a virtually unlimited time. If the ECArules tell/untell the same objects
   over and over again, ConceptBase failed to generate the corresponding events.
   This led to the termination of trigger chains even though they should have
   continued. This bug is now solved. As a side effect, ECA evaluation is now
   almost twice as fast.
   (Ticket 261)

72-70 ECA reject action also aborts ASK transactions

   The encounter of a reject action will also abort ASK transactions if the mode
   of the ECArule is 'Immediate'.

72-71 System-wide plugins not loaded under Windows

   The LPI plugins stored in conceptbase\lib\system were not loaded under Windows.
   The problem is now fixed. Plugins are programs providing additional functionality
   to the ConceptBase server, such as access to operation system functions or 
   specialized arithmetic functions.
   (Ticket 262)






You find test scripts for some of the tickets mentioned above at
    http://merkur.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/pub/bscw.cgi/2596438

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



                    CONCEPTBASE
             RELEASE NOTES for Version 7.1

   Manfred Jeusfeld, Christoph Quix, Matthias Jarke
                   ConceptBase Team

    http://www-i5.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/CBdoc/
                 http://conceptbase.cc

                     28-May-2008


ConceptBase is a multi-user deductive object manager developed at 
RWTH Aachen and Tilburg University. This document lists the changes from
ConceptBase 7.0 to ConceptBase 7.1. 

Databases created by ConceptBase 7.0 should be readable by ConceptBase 7.1.
We recommend however to extract the frame definitions of the objects via
the SaveModule utility (published in the CB-Forum, see section Notes below)
and to store the frames to a fresh ConceptBase 7.1 database.

The release notes of ConceptBase 7.0 are attached further below in this file.



Highlights of Version 7.1

* Improved meta formula support
  The new predicates (x [in] mc)  and (x [m] y) allow to query objects from
  the meta class level. The code generated from meta formulas is now attached to
  the classes where the meta formulas apply. 

* Functional expressions
  Functional and arithmetic expressions are now fully supported. It is
  also possible to recursively define new functions, e.g. for computing
  the length of the shortest path between two nodes in a graph.

* Easier Telos coding
  The syntax of Telos is more flexible and allows various shortcuts. 
  The plug-in facility for extending the functionality is now based
  on an easy-to-use programming interface. 

Besides, a couple of bugs have been corrected. The memory footprint
and the system performance are comparable to version 7.0. We have 
stopped support for the Mac OS-X (PowerPC) platform. There is however
a pre-release version of ConceptBase 7.1 available for Mac OS-X via
the ConceptBase-Forum.


Detailed Changes
================


71-01 Support for Java 6

  Java 6 runtime environments are now supported by ConceptBase. The older
  environments Java 5 (1.5) and Java 1.4 are also supported.
  (Ticket 127)

71-02 Predicates (x [in] mc) and (x [m] y)

  The two new predicates (x [in] mc) and (x [m] y) are now supported by ConceptBase.
  Among others they allow to query a database from the meta class level bypassing
  definitions at the class level. 
  (Tickets 124,138)

71-03 Linux64 library issue fixed

  The Linux64 variant was not statically linked to the necessary libraries. This shortcoming
  made the Linux64 variant unusable on systems that did not have all libraries installed.
  Since we now link all required libraries statically to the CBserver binary code, the
  problem is now solved.

71-04 Variable ranges in meta formulas

  The use of the range Proposition for a variable x in meta formulas could prevent some
  meta formulas from being compiled. A problem occured when some predicates
  like (x m y) in the formula referred to an attribute m, which is not an attribute
  of Proposition but of some other class of x. The problem has now solved by
  a more intelligent lookup of the best possible variable range for x.
  (Ticket 138)

71-05 Apostrophe syntax to indicate accesses to new database states in ECA rules

  ConcepBase now supports the shortcut `<pred> in conditions of ECA rules.
  It indicates that the predicate <pred> shall be evaluated against the newest
  database state. The new syntax is an abbreviation for the expression
  new(<pred>). which continues to be supported.

71-06 Improved EQ predicate

  The EQ predicate used to be defined for testing the equality of two numbers
  (or two functional expressions that are evaluated to numbers). We now also support
  that one or both arguments are free variables at the time when EQ is evaluated. 
  As a consequence, the EQ predicate can now be used to evaluate functional
  expressions like in (x = y+z).
  (Ticket 142)

71-07 Improved management of CBserver plug-ins

  CBserver plug-ins (file type *.lpi) can now be stored within the ConceptBase system directory
  and shall then be attached to CBserver process. This allow users to permanently extend the
  capabilities of the ConceptBase server. Moreover, the CBserver plug-ins can now use a
  simplified programming interface to the ConceptBase server. The interface is documented in
  the ConceptBase User Manual, appendix "CBserver Plug-Ins". The programming interface can be 
  used to interface to the operating system, e.g. to store information in a file or
  to e-mail it over the network, or to compute a function that cannot be expressed in O-Telos.
  (Ticket 144)

71-08 Generalized specification of find_classes

  The pre-defined query class find_classes now also finds deduced classes of a given

  object. This improves the functionality of the graph browser, the only tool that uses
  find_classes. As a follow-up consequence, parameters of some pre-defined
  query classes have to utilize the new category 'required'.
  (Tickets 145,146,147)

71-09 New syntax for inequality predicate

  Besides '(x <> y)' we now also allow '(x \= y)' and '(x \== y)'  as
  infix operators to express that x and y are not equal. Functional
  expressions are allowed in both positions. They will be evaluated before
  the inequality is tested.
  (Ticket 148)

71-10 Bug with locking databases resolved

  The ConceptBase server has a provision to prevent two CBserver processes to
  work concurrently on the same database. This provision was not working
  correctly due to a shell script bug. This is now solved.
  (Ticket 149)

71-11 Legacy code for magic set query evaluation removed

  Some of the legacy code for the old magic set evaluator has been removed.
  Since ConceptBase 6.1, the standard query evaluator is based a dedicated 
  algorithm called 'magic cache'.

71-12 UNTELL can no longer crash the CBserver

  Under rare circumstances an UNTELL could crash the CBserver. The problem
  is related to specialization links from attributes to non-attribute classes.
  The bug is now resolved.
  (Ticket 150)

71-13 Users can now be contained in their home module

  It is now possible to define a security policy that prevents users from
  leaving their home module tree. The security policy plug-in is documented in
  the CB-Forum. Unauthorized attempts to switch to read-protected module
  now cause a error message displayed to the user and written to the log file.
  (Ticket 151)

71-14 Partially evaluated sub-formulas as subclasses of the meta formula

  If a meta formula is partially evaluated, then the resulting formulas are
  stored as subclasses of the meta formula. Previously, they were stored
  as instances. This is just a cosmetic change.
  (Ticket 152)

71-15 Graph editor inherits module context from Java workbench CBiva

  The graph editor can be called from the Java workbench CBiva. Up to now,
  the home module of the graph editor was determined from the user name.
  However, the user of CBiva can have altered the current module context.
  This context is now inherited by the graph editor when called from CBiva. 
  (Ticket 153)

71-16 Omega classes not shown with untell mode 'cleanup'

  The so-called omega classes Individual, Attribute, InstanceOf, IsA are not
  shown in a Telos frames when the CBserver parameter untell mode is set to
  'cleanup' (default). This realizes a more natural behavior of the CBserver 
  to users who do not use these classes explicitely. The old behavior is 
  activated by setting the untell mode to 'verbatim'. A detailed description
  is provided by the ConceptBase user manual, see section on ConceptBase Server.
  (Ticket 154)

71-17 Regression of bug #64 solved

  The bug 'Triggers for rules/constraints fetched out of module context' (ticket 64)
  had a regression. Under specific circumstances, ConceptBase would see triggers
  from other neighbor modules. This could cause the issue of wrong error messages
  and prevent the compilation of certain correct models. This bug is now solved.
  (Ticket 155)

71-18 Better readable rule/constraint code generated from meta formulas


  A meta formula such as the definition for the necessary/single categories as partially
  evaluated to simpler forms whenever a class is defined that refers to the generic 
  concepts such as necessary/single. We now make sure that the generated code is made
  visible at a suitable context-specific class and that the formula is first optimized
  before the code is generated. This results in more readable code. The change does
  not effect the functionality but is enhancing the transparency of the 
  handling of meta formulas. It also allows to generate optimized specifications of
  modeling constructs and models with all meta formulas eliminated.

71-19 Functional expresssion in meta formulas


  Functional expressions like COUNT_Attribute[a/attrcat,x/objname] are now 
  supported by the meta formula compiler. The reverse compiler shall
  reproduce the correct functional expression for the formulas generated
  from the meta formula.
  (Ticket 158)

71-20 Triggers for similar rules disambiguated

  Two deductive rules with the same conclusion literal and just one literal in the
  condition were compiled to triggers with the same trigger identifier. This
  behavior led to the invisibility of one of the generated triggers for the
  integrity checker. This bug is now resolved.
  (Ticket 161)

71-21 Extended support for predicate (x m/n y)

  The predicate (x m/n y) is quite powerful within meta formulas when using
  in with variable argument n. However, the predicate wasn't fully supported
  by the meta formula compiler. In particular, it was not used to partially
  evaluate a given meta formula. 
  Besides, the predicate can now be used as conclusion of deductive rules. This
  allows among others to model multi-sets, i.e. derived attributes that may 
  have the same value multiple times.
  (Tickets 160,162,164)

71-22 Empty function bodies

  A function without a body (either a constraint or a Prolog implementation) could
  crash the CBserver. This bug is now resolved.
  (Ticket 163)

71-23 Even/Odd problem resolved

  The standard example EvenOdd.sml from the CB-Forum did not work in CB7.0 due
  to a bug with handling results of arithmetic functions like IPLUS ('+'). The
  bug is now fixed.
  (Ticket 167)

71-24 Parameters of views as computed attributes

  The ConceptBase server could crash or produce incomplete answers when a
  parameter of a View was also declared as 'computed_attribute'. This problem
  is solved now.
  (Ticket 168)

71-25 New command line parameter for setting multi-user mode

  The ConceptBase server can operate either in multi- or single-user mode.
  This option can now also be controlled by the new command line parameter
  -mu (multi-user mode). If the ConceptBase server is started from a shell/terminal
  window, the multi-user mode is set by default to 'enabled'. If the
  ConceptBase server is started from CBiva, the mode is set by default to
  'disabled', i.e. a ConceptBase server started from the CBiva user environment
  disallows by default other clients. The new command line parameter is supposed to
  increase the security. More details are in the user manual, section
  'ConceptBase Server'.

71-26 Old graph types removed

  The old so-called X11 graph types are removed from the release. They were
  necessary to work with the long-outdated Andrew-Toolkit-based graph browser used
  in ConceptBase V5.x and earlier. The current Java-based graph editor uses a 
  different scheme for graphical types. The command line parameter -gt x11 is
  no longer required and thus removed.
  
71-27 Problem with read-only database solved

  If ConceptBase is started from a read-only file system (or directory), e.g. from a CD-ROM,
  then the database is initialized with read-only components. This could cause severe
  problems since ConceptBase expects the database to be writable. The problem did not
  occur with Windows. The problem is now fixed by taking care that write permissions are set.
  (Ticket 170)

71-28 Deferred mode of ECA rules works also with UNTELL

  Deferred ECA rules could not be triggered by an UNTELL operation. This bug is solved.
  (Ticket 171)

71-29 Predicate typing for queries set to strict by default

  The predicate typing (a.k.a. enforcing concerned class) is now set to 'strict' for
  query classes by default. It means that all instantiation and attribution predicates
  must be linked to a unique so-called concerned class. The predicate typing is
  always enforced for rules and constraints. Hence, this change only affects query classes.
  The old more relaxed mode can be activated by using the CBserver parameter -cc off
  when starting the CBserver. More details are in the user manual.

71-30 Result types of functional expressions used for code generation

  Number-valued functional expressions in formulas require to determine the result type
  in order to generate correct executable code. The mechanism is now extended and
  supports now SUM,MIN,MAX in the proper way.
  (Ticket 172)

71-31 Shortcut syntax for function calls

  Functional expressions in rules, constraints and queries can now use the convenient
  shortcut syntax, e.g. F(x,y) instead F[x/p1,y/p2]. Like with the long form,
  functional expressions can be nested such as in F(x,G(y)). Calls of generic
  query classes have similar shortcuts, e.g. Q[x,y] instead Q[x/p1,y/p2]. The function
  COUNT has a particular shortcut #C standing for COUNT[C/class] (= number of instances of
  class C).
  (Ticket 173)

71-32 Arguments of arithmetic functions save-guarded

  An expression like Class+1 could crash the CBserver since the arguments were
  not tested on their type. This is now resolved.
  (Ticket 174)

71-33 Simplifications for active rules

  Active rules can now use the Retell action as an abbreviation of Untell+Tell. Furthermore,
  The syntax for events and actions allows shortcuts like 'Tell (x in c)' instead 
  'Tell((x in c))', which continues to be supported.

71-34 Range test always after function call

  Functions that generate new result objects must be evaluated before the result type is
  tested. ConceptBase now maps all predicates (x in F(y)) to the format (x = F(y)).
  This format makes sure that the result type is tested after the function call.
  (Ticket 176)

71-35 Forward-declaration of query classes

  A system of recursively defined query classes can only be compiled if the signature
  of a query is known before a quary call is compiled. ConceptBase now allows forward-
  declaration of query classes (and functions) for this purpose.
  (Ticket 177)

71-36 Recursive function definitions

  ConceptBase now supports recursive definitions of functions, e.g. for computing the
  Fibonacci numbers, or for computing the length of the shortest path between two nodes.
  This new feature is useful for example to define hierarchical measures on tree-structured
  models.
  (Ticket 175)
   
71-37 'Dirty' query calls regarded as completed

  The recursive query evaluator of ConceptBase has to deal with situations where a query call
  recursively calls itself (with same arguments). Such calls are delayed and marked as
  'dirty'. Under some circumstances such calls could change their state to 'completed' without
  having computed the complete extension. ConceptBase now uses the intermediate state 'pending'
  for dealing with such situation. Subsequent query evaluations will then re-evaluate the
  'dirty' query calls rather than regarding the partial extension as complete.
  (Ticket 179)

71-38 Define function/query signatures within LPI files

  LPI files are used to extend the functionality of the ConceptBase server by user-programmed
  functions and queries. It is now possible to include the Telos frame defining the signature 
  of the new functions/queries within the LPI file by a 'tell' clause. 

71-39 Mac-OS-X (PowerPC) no longer supported

  The platform Mac-OS-X on PowerPC is no longer supported. The last release supporting that
  platform is ConceptBase 7.1 built January 18, 2008. It is available from the 
  ConceptBase Forum.


Issues
======

* Linux and Solaris users need to make sure that libstdc++.so.6 is installed on their
  systems. It is part for example of the Gnu CC 4.1 package but can also be installed
  separately from the Gnu CC package.

* Objects names and attribute labels starting with 'id_' should be
  avoided since ConceptBase uses this prefix to characterize
  internal object identifiers. Likewise, no object name should 
  start with 'xX' or 'Xx' since this is used internally to characterize
  variable positions during query evaluation.

* The nodes sizes in the graph editor are not recomputed when the
  graph palette (assignment of graphical types to displayed objects) is
  changed. This can lead to truncation of object labels when the new
  graphical type is smaller than the initial one. You may try the
  operation  'Current connection / Validate and update shown objects' to
  circumvene this behavior.

* When a complex graph (e.g. links from links to other links) is displayed
  and the user moves a node around the windows, the reference points of
  some links can be set to arbitrary locations. 

* The TCP/IP interface between the CBserver and a client has a builtin
  delay that slows down transaction streams (series of many consecutive
  transactions). This makes the start-up of the graph editor a bit slow since
  the graph editor issues long streams of transactions when displaying objects.

* The Solaris version occasionally has problems with passing parameterized
  query calls from a ConceptBase client to the CBserver. Use 'Ask Query Call'
  with an explicit query call like 'Q[x/param]' to circumvene this problem.
  Other platforms do not suffer from this problem.

* Aggregation functions like COUNT should not be used in integrity constraints
  or rules since the incremental constraint checker cannot maintain
  the extension (=set of all ground solutions) of aggregation functions.
  There are however tricks to cope with certain usage patterns. See section
   HOW-TO / Avoid traps with aggregation functions in constraints
  in the CB-Forum.

* The rollback time mechanism (CBiva: Options / Select Version) can be used
  to query past database states. This feature does not work currently under
  Windows when the daylight saving ('summer time') is activated. In countries
  of the northern hemisphere, daylight saving is usually activated between end
  march and end october of the year. 
  Outside this time and on other platforms (Solaris, Linux, Mac OS), there
  should be no problems.

* When ECA rules update the database, ConceptBase will automatically disable the cache-
  based query evaluator. The cache would be invalid because of the update.) 
  Instead, ConceptBase will use the standard Prolog-style query evaluator. Since
  the ON-part of an ECA rule can call the query (literal) evaluator, calls to
  recursive predicates could run into infinite loops. 

* If you terminate a nonpersistent ConceptBase server by Control-C or by killing
  the corresponding process, then the temporary database continues to exist in the
  directory of temporary files (usually /tmp under Unix and C:\Temp under Windows).
  This is as such not a problem but over time the temporary databases can consume
  more and more disk space. We advise to remove every 12 months these dead databases.
  The directories have the names <username><digits> where <username> is the name
  of the user that started the server and <digits> is a sequence of digits and underscores.

* Be carefull with the -r parameter of CBserver under Linux/Unix. It can potentially
  cause an infinite loop when the CBserver executable crashes at startup. 
  Besides, the -r option is very useful if you want a to provide a stable
  service based on ConceptBase. It will restart the CBserver executable whenever 
  it has crashed (crashes are very hard to trigger anyway). The -r option is
  not available under Windows due to the limited scripting support under Windows.

* CBiva does not work if you enable desktop effects (a.k.a. Beryl) with Ubuntu. This 
  is a known bug in Java Swing and not likely to be fixed in the near future.
  We recommend not to use desktop effects.

* The graph editor of CBiva is incompatible to Java 6, Update 10 and later. We recommend
  to use Java 5 or Java 6, Update 8.  You can check your Java version by
     java -version
  in a command window.




Notes
=====

The CB-Forum is a workspace where ConceptBase users and developers share
documents, models, and software. The address is
      http://merkur.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/bscw/bscw.cgi/0/187789



Trademarks
==========


All trademarks used in this text are property of their respective owners.


Acknowledgments
===============

We thanks all ConceptBase users for their valuable feedback. 
We thank the SWI-Prolog for their excellent work and support.

  




---
attached: release notes of earlier versions










-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------





                C O N C E P T B A S E

            RELEASE NOTES for Version 7.0

                   ConceptBase Team
              RWTH Aachen, Informatik V
               Prof. Dr. Matthias Jarke
                    Ahornstr. 55
                 52056 Aachen, Germany
               Tel.: +49-241-80-21-501
               Fax   +49-241-80-22-321
      email: cb@i5.informatik.rwth-aachen.de
    http://www-i5.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/CBdoc/
                 http://conceptbase.cc



ConceptBase is a multi-user deductive object manager developed at 
RWTH Aachen and Tilburg University. This document lists the changes from
ConceptBase 6.1.2 to ConceptBase 7.0. See instructions at the end of this
document on how to transform Telos source models created with ConceptBase 6.1.2
to comply with ConceptBase version 7.0


Highlights of ConceptBase 7.0
=============================

 * Supports more platforms
   Besides Linux, Solaris, and Windows, we now also support Mac OS-X for PowerPC
   and Linux64 for x64. The support for x64 CPUs has virtually removed the 4GB
   limit for databases.

 * Much faster for most operations
   Query processing is between 30% and 2500% faster. For example, the computation
   of the transitive closure of a graph with 1400 nodes took 300 seconds with
   ConceptBase 6.1. It now just takes 11 seconds on a 3 years old PC. Simple 
   queries to smaller databases enjoy a more moderate speed-up. 

 * More expressive 
   In particular, the active rule component is now fully integrated with the
   integrity checker and its computational model has been changed. You now can
   easily define the dynamic semantics of petri nets as a meta model in Telos! 

 * Small and robust
   While ConceptBase is typically installed on harddisks, you can also install it on
   a memory stick or CD and start it from there without any further installation!
   Numerous bugs and shortcomings are corrected. A complete list is given below.


ConceptBase 7.0 is capable to manage large models with literally hundreds of
thousands of concepts. Earlier versions already greatly supported the meta
modeling of conceptual modeling languages. With the new release, you can also
start to define semantics of dynamic modeling languages and use the configurable
graph editor to visualize models and their use.



Detailed Changes
================


70-01 Support for Mac OS-X and Linux64 added

  Two new platforms are now supported by ConceptBase: Mac OS-X for
  PowerPC CPUs and Linux for AMD64 (EMT64) CPUs.
  The Linux64 variant is virtually lifting the 32bit address space
  limitation that also restricts the maximum database size for
  ConceptBase on 32bit machines. Besides the two new platforms,
  ConceptBase continues to support Linux (i386), Solaris (sparc and i386),
  and Windows XP/2000. All variants are now based on SWI-Prolog. 


70-02 Faster query evaluation

  Query processing under the Linux variants of ConceptBase can be
  about 3 times faster than under version 6.1.2. Particular queries under
  the Linux variants can run up to 25 times faster than under 6.1.2.
  The other variants enjoy a more moderate speed-up ranging from below 10%
  to a factor of 8. Integrity checking is also faster on average.


70-03 Revision of the graph editor

  The graph editor now provides image scaling (zoom-in, zoom-out) as
  well as some auto-layout functionality.


70-04 Bug in incremental meta formula compiler corrected

  Formulas generated from meta-level formulas are now correctly
  removed from the system when the meta-formula is removed.
  Moreover, the system has the same behavior regardless of in
  which sequence the meta-formulas are occurring in a TELL operation.
  Previously, one had to take care of the sequence or split
  definitions of meta-level formulas over several TELL
  operations. (Ticket 45)


70-05 Answer formatting uses internal cache

  The user-defined answer formats are now utilizing an internal cache
  when producing an answer to a query. This speeds up the computation
  of queries that use complex answer formats with repeating fragments.
  You need to set the cache mode (parameter -c) to 'keep' to
  enable this feature.


70-06 Customized error messages for integrity constraints 


  Error messages about integrity violations were using a
  fixed set of domain-independent textual formats. In many cases,
  it is useful to give more detailed information why the violation
  occurred. The feature is also available for meta-level constraints,
  i.e. constraints that define the semantics of user-defined modeling
  constructs like partOf. See ConceptBase user manual for more
  information on customized error messages.
  The predefined error messages were partially rewritten to improve
  readability, and object identifiers are now replaced by object
  names wherever possible. The internal code (like 'IC_NOTSAT') of
  an error message is no longer shown in the ConceptBase user interface.
  It remains visible in the CBserver console if the trace mode is set
  to 'low' or higher. (Ticket 58)


70-07 Variables in nested sub-expressions

  Nested functional expressions like
      COUNT[InputLink[~tr/trans,pl/place]/class]
  can contain variables like ~tr and pl quantified in the formula. In such
  cases, the evaluation led to wrong results since the nested variables
  were not found by the formula compiler. ConceptBase now correctly
  identifies all variables. (Ticket 52)


70-08 Objects can now use attributes of derived classes

  In ConceptBase 6.1.2 and earlier, an object had to be an explicit
  (=stored) instance of a class or one of its subclasses in order to
  instantiate the attributes defined for that class. The only
  exception were the builtin classes Individual, Proposition, and
  Attribute whose instances are derived based on the structure of an
  object. Now, an object can instantiate the attributes of a class
  if it is an instance of the class, regardless whether instantiation
  is explicit or derived by a user-defined rule. If the rule is removed,
  then the instantiation of the attributes stays in the system.
  If you deem this too liberal, you can add a stronger axiom by a
  meta-level constraint that would universally detect if an object
  no longer is an instance of a class. See 
        CB-Forum/How-To/Define your own axioms 
  for an example. (Ticket 61)



70-09 Nested functional expressions in comparison literals

  Expressions like "(COUNT[ToUnit[~this/unit]/class] >= 2)" are now
  allowed in query definitions. Previously, one had to introduce auxiliary
  variables like in
   "exists n/Integer  (n in COUNT[ToUnit[~this/unit]/class]) and (n >= 2)".
  The new treatment of functional expressions improves readability
  of queries. (Ticket 46)


70-10 Quantifiers in deductive rules

  ConceptBase 6.1.2 and earlier imposed a strong restriction on the use of
  quantifiers in deductive rule: the forall-quantified variables of
  a rule had to be exactly the free variables in the conclusion literal.
  This restriction is now relaxed to: the free variables in the conclusion literal
  must be forall-quantified. For example a rule expression like
    $ forall x,y,z/C1 P1(x,y) and P2(y,z) ==> P3(x,z) $
  is now accepted. In ConceptBase 6.1.2 one had to define
    $ forall x,z/C1 (exists y/C1 P1(x,y) and P2(y,z)) ==> P3(x,z) $
  The old style is still accepted and is logically equivalent.
  If you have a meta-level rule with your ConceptBase 6.1.2
  installation that uses the old style for variable quantification,you
  might have to change it to the new style, however. See the HOW-TO section
  of the ConceptBase Forum for examples.


70-11 New infix-style literal (x m/n y)

  The AL literal now has an infix syntax as well. The AL literal is documented
  in the ConceptBase User manual.


70-12 Common syntax for infix literals

  Infix literals like (x < y), (x in C), (x m y) etc. are now required
  to be enclosed on parentheses. Before, one could also omit the
  parentheses like in "x in C and x < 10". The new restriction prevents
  phantom error messages issued by the formula parser.


70-13 Visibility of rules/constraints in modules

  Rules and constraints should only be checked if they are visible
  in the current module context. ConceptBase 6.1.2 missed some cases
  in checking visibility and thus evaluated some rules/constraints
  out of context. This is now resolved. Rules and constraints are
  now fully integrated into the module system of ConceptBase.


70-14 Faulty error messages on satisfied constraints
 
  Under rare circumstances, error messages were generated even though
  a constraint was satisfied. This is now solved. (Ticket 63)


70-15 Disabled popup-menus in graph editor

  The graph editor disabled the pop-up menu 'instance of' for some
  objects. This is now resolved. (Ticket 55)


70-16 Meta formula compiler now also analyzes Label literals 

  If a formula contains a literal like Label(x,m) where m is a
  variable, then ConceptBase treats the formula as a meta-formula,
  i.e. it tries to partially evaluate the formula to versions where
  m is bound to a constant. This behavior is consistent with the
  treatment of predicates (x m y). (Ticket 59)


70-17 COUNT function 10-200 times faster

  By re-implementing the internal code, the COUNT function is
  now much faster.


70-18 Large frames are constructed more efficiently

  Constructing large answer frames consumes less memory and is more
  efficient as well.


70-19 Queries with UNIFIES literals treated more efficiently

  UNIFIES predicates are evaluated as early as possible since they
  bind variables at low cost.


70-20 New function StringToLabel

  There is a new pre-defined function StringToLabel, which can be
  used in formulas. See ConceptBase User Manual for details.


70-21 More efficient data structure for cached literals

  The literal evaluation is in certain cases about 10 times faster
  than before by implementing a better data structure for the
  index of already called literals. Linear queries, i.e. queries
  that theoretically can be answered in linear time O(n), are now really
  answered in linear time. Before, there was a slight 
  quadratic component in the performance of the query evaluation.


70-22 New parameter -e (maxErrorMessages)

  The CBserver has a new command line parameter -e to limit
  number of error messages sent to a ConceptBase client as response
  to a transaction. This feature is useful in situations where
  a single transaction can generate literally hundreds of error messages.
  All error messages will still be displayed in the console window where the
  ConceptBase server has been started as long as the trace mode is set
  to 'low' or higher.


70-23 Removed legacy syntax for some literals

  The literal syntax AttrValue and AttrId is no longer supported.
  Use A or Ai instead.


70-24 Queries now also work with objects generated on the fly

  A query can cause the generation of new objects, in particular in
  combination with functions like COUNT. This disabled the cache-based
  literal evaluator, which was necessary to guarantee termination
  of query evaluation. This bug is now resolved. Objects generated
  on the fly will not disable the cache-based literal evaluator.
  (Ticket 66)

 
70-25 Multiple selection of objects in Display Instances

  The Display Instances dialog of the ConceptBase User Interface (CBiva)
  now allows to select multiple objects to be loaded into the Telos Editor.
  (Ticket 27)


70-26 Linewidth now correctly processed by Graph Editor

  The Graph Editor now correctly processes linewidth attributes defined
  in graphical types for link objects. (Ticket 36)


70-27 No more phantom links in graph editor 

  The graph editor allows to remove objects (including links) from
  the database. Under certain circumstances, it could occur that
  deleted links remained visible. This bug is now solved.


70-28 Old Tcl/Tk user interface removed from the distribution

  The old Tcl/Tk-based user interface CBworkbench has been removed
  from the distribution. CBworkbench is still contained in the
  CB 6.1.2 branch but is no longer fully compatible with CB 7.0 server,
  i.e., a CBworkbench can access a CB 7.0 server but not use all
  the functionality like switching the module context.
  We recommend to switch to the  Java-based user interface CBiva,
  which is the standard user interface of ConceptBase since version 6.1.2.


70-29 Attribute, IsA, and InstanceOf do not specialize Proposition

  The three O-Telos builtin objects Attribute, IsA, and InstanceOf are not
  longer explicit specializations of the object Proposition (being the
  most generic object in O-Telos). In fact, the explicit specialization is
  redundant since all objects (regardless whether an instance of Attribute,
  InstanceOf, IsA or Individual) are automatically also an instance of
  Proposition. As a user, you will not be affected by this change unless
  your application explicitly refers to the removed specialization 
  relationships (Attribute isA Proposition, InstanceOf isA Proposition,
  IsA isA Proposition). (Ticket 73)


70-30 Menues in graph editor context-sensitive

  The popup-menus for displaying incoming and outgoing links are now
  context-sensitive. Only those attribute categories are listed for which 
  the selected object has at least one attribute. This should make browsing
  more comfortable since the menus are much smaller. The added comfort
  comes at the expense of slighly longer reaction times, in particular when
  the operation is invoked the first time. 
  Along with this change comes a change with the predefined queries of
  ConceptBase. You should not access a database created with the old
  ConceptBase software with the graph editor of the new ConceptBase user
  interface. 


70-31 Default cachemode set to 'keep'

  The default cache mode (command line parameter -c) is now 'keep'. It used
  to be 'transient'. The 'keep' mode is more efficient in most cases. 
  You can explicitly set the cache mode to 'transient' if you prefer this
  mode. The maximum cache size has been updated to 50000 (was 15000) to
  cope with complex queries and to reduce the frequency of cache resets.
  See ConceptBase user manual, section on ConceptBase server, for
  more information.


70-32 User-defined functions

  You can now define instances of Function much like instances of
  GenericQueryClass. User-defined functions can then
  occur in functional expressions inside queries. See section
  "HOW-TO/Define Functions" of the CB-Forum for examples.


70-33 Error window in CBiva more readable

  The background color for error messages is now brighter for improved
  readability.


70-34 Comparison literals evaluated before all arguments bound

  Under certain circumstances, comparison literals like (x < y) were
  evaluated before its arguments x,y were bound to values. This
  is now resolved. (Ticket 77)


70-35 Stratification tests re-implemented

  The test on dynamic stratification has been re-implemented. It generates
  error messages if an attempt is made to prove P(x) under the assumption that
  not P(x) is true. The old test was failing to detect certain cases and 
  generated in other cases error messages even when there was no
  stratification violation. (Ticket 79)


70-36 Following derived attributes in graph editor

  Some derived attributes could not be followed in the graph editor.
  The case is linked to ticket 61 (see above: Objects can now use attributes of
  derived classes). If an object like x in instance to a class c by
  means of a rule, then it can use its attributes, e.g. to define a
  deductive rule about such an attribute.
  Precisely these deductive rules were not evaluated when one displayed
  an object like x in the graph editor and tried to follow the
  derived attributes of x. The error did not occur when evaluating
  queries. The problem is now fixed and one can follow derived attributes
  regardless on whether the case of ticket 61 is true or the regular
  case, i.e. x in an explicit instance of c. (Ticket 81)


70-37 Unstratified cache may not be reused

  If a stratification error is detected during query evaluation, the
  cache of derived facts is logically inconsistent (implying for some
  predicate that it is both true and false). In such a case, the cache
  should not be used for subsequent query processing. This regime is now 
  supported in ConceptBase 7.0.



70-38 ECA rules and integrity constraints

  ConceptBase 7.0 now fully integrates ECA rules with integrity checking.
  If an ECA rule updates the database, then this update is subjected
  to integrity checking. If a constraint is violated, the whole transaction
  (incl. the effect of ECA rules on the database) is rolled back. If
  an ECA rule has called an external program, e.g. for sending an email,
  then this part of the action cannot be rolled back. (Ticket 83)


70-39 Mutually dependent recursive rules

  Under certain circumstances, rule sets where one recursive rule R1
  depends on another recursive rule R2 which in turn depends on R1 could lead to
  incomplete answers. This is now solved. See EvenOdd.sml in
  the CB-Forum as example for mutually dependent rules/queries. (Ticket 85)


70-40 Improved Datalog code for queries


  Literals In(x,c) are replaced by c(x) in the Datalog code when c is
  a query class without parameters and retrieved/computed attributes. This
  can significantly improve the efficiency of query evaluation in case of
  recursive queries. (Ticket 86)



70-41 Avoid transformation of non-numerical objects into variables

  Comparison literals (x = y), (x < y) are not only allowed for numbers but
  virtually for any object. If an object has a name like ZERO (i.e. starting with
  a capital character), then ConceptBase transformed it into a variable
  following the Prolog convention for variables. This bug is now resolved.
  The evaluation of comparison literals is now about 10% faster than under
  ConceptBase 6.1.2. (Ticket 88)


70-42 Answer format for queries selectable at the user interface

  The window popping up when asking a query now includes a selection box
  for the answer format. By default, the answer format is set to 'FRAME'
  (=Telos frame syntax). Consult the user manual on how to specify customized
  answer formats. 


70-43 Module content listable

  The predicate A(m,contains,x) as well as (m contains x) can be used to
  check whether an object x is contained in a ConceptBase module m. 


70-44 Floating point numbers in Solaris-sparc variant 

  Floating point numbers in the Solaris-sparc variant are now displayed in
  the same way as in the other platform variants of ConceptBase. They
  are now consistently displayed by the shortest decimal representation
  coded '%g' in the C language, e.g. 19.81 instead of 1.9810000e+001.



70-45 Generic query classes excluded from integrity constraints and rules

  As explained in the user manual, query classes can be referred to 
  in integrity constraints and deductive rules. For technical reasons,
  generic query classes have to be excluded. Otherwise, certain
  integrity violations would not be detected. This exclusion is now
  ensured. (Ticket 90)


70-46 Active rules with more than one free variable

  Active rules (ECA rules) were limited to have at most one free variable
  in the IF part. This limitation is now removed. There is no limit
  in the number of free variables in the IF part. The DO part will be
  executed for any solution of the IF part binding the free variables to
  some constants. Conditions in active rules can now be arbitrary boolean
  expressions (and,or,not) over predicates testing the current and new database state.
  Examples for the new capabilities are in the HOW-TO section of the
  CB-Forum. (Ticket 83)

  
70-47 Depth attribute of active rules correctly interpreted

  Earlier releases of ConceptBase ignored the depth attribute. This bug
  is now corrected. You can now protect your ECA rules against 
  infinite loops if you know a limit for the maximum number of calls
  to an ECA rule within one transaction.

  
70-48 Multiple updates to the same object in one transaction

  ConceptBase now allows to untell/tell the same object (in particular attribute)
  in a single transaction. This feature is only applicable when evaluating
  active rules. Such rules can now untell/tell the same object several times,
  for example due to multiple firings of active rules in one transaction.
  Only the final state of an object will be made persistent after the transaction
  has committed. (Ticket 92)


70-49 FIFO sequencing of ECA rule firings

  ECA rules with modes ImmediateDeferred and Deferred used to by evaluated 
  with a last-in-first-out (LIFO) strategy, i.e. the most recent fired ECA rule would
  be executed first. This strategy can lead to incorrect results since a
  current ECA rule might not have been fully executed when a new ECA rule is
  already started. To avoid this 'racing condition', ConceptBase now enforces
  a strict FIFO sequencing of ECA rule executions. (Ticket 93)


70-50 Hostname included in registration message of ConceptBase client

  A client such as CBiva registering to a ConceptBase server shall now include
  the name of the local host in the registration message (ENROLL_ME). If the
  hostname cannot be retrieved locally, the label "unknownhost" is used.
  This change does not impact the functionality of ConceptBase. The transmitted
  hostname shall be displayed with the corresponding ENROLL_ME message in the
  console window of the ConceptBase server. Besides this, a small bug in checking
  the user name on Windows platforms was solved. (Ticket 95)


70-51 Checking on first/last frame in answer formats

  The answer formatting utility of ConceptBase now adheres to two new predicates
  ISFIRSTFRAME() and ISLASTFRAME(). They can be used in the IFTHENELSE construct.
  (Ticket 30)


70-52 Self-triggering ECA rules evaluated more efficiently

  Active rules whose actions part matches its event can trigger themselves
  or other active rules. Typically such rules (or rule systems) are generating
  a lot of triggers and push ConceptBase to its limits. By several measures,
  the efficiency of the ECA rule evaluator has been improved by up to 20%. Among others, 
  duplicates in the trigger pipeline are avoided, processed triggers
  are garbage-collected and the set-oriented interface of the object store 
  is utilized to get all new objects in a single call. Simple ECA rules do not
  benefit from these improvements. Examples on self-triggering ECA rules
  can be found in the HOW-TO section of the CB-Forum.


70-53 UNTELL now inverse to TELL if UntellMode=cleanup

  There is a new command line option -U (UntellMode) by which the behavior of the
  UNTELL operation can be controlled. If set to 'cleanup', UNTELL will try to remove
  exactly those P-facts inserted by the TELL operation executed on the same frame.
  This type of behavior (UNTELL(x) is the reverse of TELL(x)) is expected by
  many users of ConceptBase. The default value for UntellMode is 'verbatim', i.e.
  only the facts specifically contained in the frame are untold. The ConceptBase user
  manual contains more on this. (Ticket 98)


70-54 Correct handling of nested query calls

  A query call has in general the format Q[x1/p1,...,xn/pn]. It can be that some
  value x is itself a query call. We call such expressions nested query calls.
  ConceptBase did not handle the evaluation correctly when the cache mode was
  'transient' or 'keep'. This is now corrected. (Ticket 99) 


70-55 New predicate Terminated

  The new predicate Terminated(x,t) allows to retrieve the time at which an object
  is no longer visible in the object base. This is the time when the object has been
  untold. It will return "tt(infinity)" if the object has not yet been untold. (Ticket 100)


70-56 ASK can update the database

  Intuitively, a query (ASK) to a database does not change its contents. There are two
  cases where this general does not apply. First, the query can be a so-called builtin
  query, i.e. a query that is implemented by user-definable code. Such queries are allowed
  to do basically any kind of update and the update will remain persistent after the call
  of the query. Second, the call of a query may match the ON part of an ECA rule, hence
  triggering it. The effect of such a triggering can be an update to the database. It
  will be persistent as well. If a query is asked on a historical rollback time (i.e., on
  a past state of the database), then ECA rule triggering is disabled. Furthermore, queries
  that are asked by their frame definition rather than by the query call expression Q[params]
  will also not be allowed to trigger ECA rules. Queries asked as frames are typically
  only defined during the ASK transaction. They should not leave a trace in the database.
  Earlier version of ConceptBase prevented query calls from updating the database persistently.
  (Ticket 102)


70-57 Menu item Ask Objname renamed

  The menu item Edit/Ask Objname of CBiva has been renamed to Edit/Ask Query Call. This is
  a more logical label for the function.


70-58 Unique names for temporary object bases

  When the CBserver is started in nonpersistent mode, it will create a temporary directory
  in the file system of computer running ConceptBase. ConceptBase had been using then process
  identifier to create a unique name for the directory. This is however not unique. The 
  operating system only uses a limited number digits for process ids. Hence, it can happen
  that a CBserver is assigned an existing temporary directory name. To avoid this, ConceptBase
  now uses a different method based on the system clock. This should avoid failures
  to start the CBserver in case of double-used directory names.


70-59 CBserver script now Bourne shell

  The Linux/Unix script CBserver used to be a C-shell script, i.e. it requires that csh
  (or tcsh) is installed on the computer where the CBserver is started. Many OS platforms
  like Linux or Mac OS-X do not have csh pre-installed but only the Bourne shell sh.
  For that reason, we have translated CBserver to a Bourne shell script. Thus, no need
  to install csh or tcsh anymore. The Windows variant is not affected by this change.


70-60 Answers ordered by object identifier

   The answer formatting system of ConceptBase allows to order the answer to a query 
   according to different criteria, e.g. the object name or the value of an attribute.
   ConceptBase 7.0 now allows to order the answer also according to the object 
   identifier. Set the attribute orderBy of the answer format to "this.oid" to
   enable this feature. Since object identifiers are assigned in ascending order,
   ordering by it delivers the objects in the order in which they were created in the
   database. (Ticket 108)


70-61 Additional parameters for answer formatting

   Answer formats can now substitute parameters of the query call inside the head, tail and
   pattern strings. So, if the query call was Q[val/param] then the string {param}
   will be replaced by val. Moreover, there are predefined parameters {user} for the
   name of the current user, {transactiontime} for the time when the current transaction
   was started, {cb_version} for the version number of ConceptBase, plus some more that
   are not documented. 


70-62 Operator .oid can be used as tail of any path expression in answer formats

   In earlier releases of ConceptBase, only this.oid was supported as path expression
   for displaying the oid of an object in an answer format. Now, you can also use it
   in any path expression, e.g. {this.outputattr.oid}.


70-63 Validate shown objects missed retell-case

   The option 'Validate shown objects' of the graph editor missed cases where 
   a RETELL operation had changed the database before. This flaw is now corrected.
   (Ticket 84)


70-64 Derived attributes more readable in graph editor

   Derived attributes were displayed by dotted lined with label 'deduced'.
   This made is difficult to distinguish derived attributes with different
   attribute categories. This is now solved. Instead of 'derived', the graph editor
   now uses the attribute category as the label. (Ticket 82)


70-65 Division by zero hooked at CBserver

   Division by zero, e.g. IDIV[1/i1/0/i2] or DIV[1/r1/0/r2] will no longer crash
   the CBserver. It used to be detected by the underlying Prolog runtime system. Now,
   an attempt to divide by zero is detected by the CBserver and leads to an
   error message sent to the client. (Ticket 115)


70-66 Ordering of generated rules influenced integrity evaluator

   Under rare circumstances, the ordering of clauses generated from deductive 
   rules could have a negative impact on the correct evaluation of integrity 
   constraints, and also on query evaluation. This bug is now solved. (Ticket 119)


70-67 Blanks in directory paths and user names

   Following ISO conventions, directory and file names should not contain special
   characters such as blanks. However, operating platforms like Windows are not 
   following this ISO convention, e.g. like in C:\Program Files. Installing ConceptBase
   into such directories rendered some scripts of ConceptBase un-operational.
   As such file names are becoming more and more frequent, ConceptBase now can operate

   in their presence. Similarily, user names may also contain blanks now. Still, we
   recommend to install ConceptBase into directories whose absolute path does not
   contain special characters, e.g. C:\ConceptBase rather than C:\Program Files\ConceptBase.
   The Linux/Unix versions of ConceptBase must continue to use proper ISO-compliant directory
   paths. (Tickets 109,112,117)


70-68 Problem with special characters like umlauts resolved

   Umlauts and other special characters could cause crashes of the CBserver on some platforms
   like Windows and Linux because they could not be stored on an internal logfile.
   Since the logfile is no longer used by the CBserver, this problem has now vanished.
   (Ticket 121)


70-69 Functions to be evaluated with maximally bound arguments

   Arithmetic functions like PLUS should only be evaluated when all arguments are bound
   to constants. ConceptBase now pushes the evaluation of such functions towards the end
   of the executable Datalog code in order to fulfill this requirement. (Tickets 122,125)


70-70 Second evaluation of arithmetic function could crash the server

   The ConceptBase server could crash under rare circumstances when a query containing
   arithmetic functions was evaluated twice, i.e. in two consecutive ASK operations.
   The reason was that intermediate results were stored as temporary objects and as
   entries in the query cache. While the temporary objects are removed after a transaction,
   the query cache remains active by default. That could lead to inconsistencies and
   attempts to access non-existing memory addresses. The problem is now solved. (Ticket 123)


70-71 Untell in update mode cleanup could crash the server

   Under very rare circumstances, an untell operation could send the server in a loop that
   ultimately ended with a stack overflow. The problem only occurred when the update mode
   mode was set to cleanup and recursive rules with specific patterns were defined before.
   Since the update mode is by default set to 'verbatim', hardly any user ever experienced
   this problem. The bug is now resolved. (Ticket 126)


70-72 View maintenance disabled by default

   The CBserver parameter -v (ViewMaintenanceRules) is set by default to 'off', i.e.
   no view maintenance rules are generated. Normal usages of ConceptBase are not
   affected by this change (except that the Tell operation is faster). You can 
   enable the view maintenance rule generation by starting the CBserver with parameter 
   -v set to 'on'. The view maintenance feature is not yet discussed in the user 
   manual, hence it should be disabled by default.


70-73 Problems to display 'class' attributes in graph editor

   If some attribute was defined as instance of Class (which is an unusual use of
   the object Class), then ConceptBase regarded the object as a class-like object
   in the graph editor. By default such objects are displayed as nodes with blue background.
   However, attributes are links that can not be displayed as nodes. The problem is
   now solved. (Ticket 131)
   



Issues
======

* The new Java 6 runtime environment is not yet fully supported by ConceptBase.
  Use Java 5 (1.5) or Java 1.4 instead.

* Mac OS-X users might have to install the library libreadline.5.0.dylib
  (package readline available thru darwinports) to the directory /usr/local/lib.

* Linux and Solaris users need to make sure that libstdc++.so.6 is installed on their
  systems. It is part for example of the Gnu CC 4.1 package but can also be installed
  separately from the Gnu CC package.

* Objects names and attribute labels starting with 'id_' should be
  avoided since ConceptBase uses this prefix to characterize
  internal object identifiers. Likewise, no object name should 
  start with 'xX' since this is used internally to characterize
  variable positions during query evaluation.

* The nodes sizes in the graph editor are not recomputed when the
  graph palette (assignment of graphical types to displayed objects) is
  changed. This can lead to truncation of object labels when the new
  graphical type is smaller than the initial one. You may try the
  operation  'Current connection / Validate and update shown objects' to
  circumvene this behavior.

* When a complex graph (e.g. links from links to other links) is displayed
  and the user moves a node around the windows, the reference points of
  some links can be set to arbitrary locations. 

* The TCP/IP interface between the CBserver and a client has a builtin
  delay that slows down transaction streams (series of many consecutive
  transactions). This makes the start-up of the graph editor a bit slow since
  the graph editor issues long streams of transactions when displaying objects.

* The Solaris version occasionally has problems with passing parameterized
  query calls from a ConceptBase client to the CBserver. Use 'Ask Query Call'
  with an explicit query call like 'Q[x/param]' to circumvene this problem.
  Other platforms do not suffer from this problem.

* Aggregation functions like COUNT should not be used in integrity constraints
  or rules since the incremental constraint checker cannot maintain
  the extension (=set of all ground solutions) of aggregation functions.
  There are however tricks to cope with certain usage patterns. See section
   HOW-TO / Avoid traps with aggregation functions in constraints
  in the CB-Forum.

* The rollback time mechanism (CBiva: Options / Select Version) can be used
  to query past database states. This feature does not work currently under
  Windows when the daylight saving ('summer time') is activated. In countries
  of the northern hemisphere, daylight saving is usually activated between end
  march and end october of the year. 
  Outside this time and on other platforms (Solaris, Linux, Mac OS), there
  should be no problems.

* When ECA rules update the database, ConceptBase will automatically disable the cache-
  based query evaluator. The cache would be invalid because of the update.
  Instead, ConceptBase will use the standard Prolog-style query evaluator. Since
  the ON-part of an ECA rule can call the query (literal) evaluator, calls to
  recursive predicates could run into infinite loops. 

* If you terminate a nonpersistent ConceptBase server by Control-C or by killing
  the corresponding process, then the temporary database continues to exist in the
  directory of temporary files (usually /tmp under Unix and C:\Temp under Windows).
  This is as such not a problem but over time the temporary databases can consume
  more and more disk space. We advise to remove every 12 months these dead databases.
  The directories have the names <username><digits> where <username> is the name
  of the user that started the server and <digits> is a sequence of digits and underscores.

* Be carefull with the -r parameter of CBserver under Linux/Unix. It can potentially
  cause an infinite loop when the CBserver executable crashes at startup. 
  Besides, the -r option is very useful if you want a to provide a stable
  service based on ConceptBase. It will restart the CBserver executable whenever 
  it has crashed (crashes are very hard to trigger anyway). The -r option is
  not available under Windows due to the limited scripting support under Windows.



Transition of ConceptBase 6.1.2 to ConceptBase 7.0
==================================================


Most Telos source models (*.sml) produced by ConceptBase 6.1.2 should be readable
without change by ConceptBase 7.0. However there are the following restrictions:

R1: The old predicate names AttrValue and AttrId are no longer supported. Use A(x,m,y)
    instead AttrValue(x,m,y) and Ai(a,m,o) instead of AttrId(x,m,o).

R2: All infix predicates need to be enclosed in parantheses. 


      Old              New
      -------------------------
      x in c           (x in c)
      c isA d          (c isA d)
      x < y            (x < y)
      ...              ...

R3: The use of the variable name 'this' without preceding tilde character is
    deprecated in version 7.0. Use '~this' instead of 'this'.

R4: Variables in deductive rules should be universally quantified, i.e.
    instead of
      forall x/C (exists y/D cond(x,y)) ==> P(x)
    your should write
      forall x/C y/D cond(x,y) ==> P(x)
    The old style is still working but may cause problems if the deductive
    rule is a so-called meta-formula.


Binary databases created with version 6.1.2 are not directly processable by
ConceptBase 7.0. You need to extract the concept definitions from the old database
by using ConceptBase 6.1.2 into a Telos source model (*.sml) and then tell
the definitions to the new ConceptBase 7.0. The ConceptBase Forum contains utilities
to partly automate this task, see section "HOW-TO/Save Telos models" in the CB-Forum.





Notes
=====

The CB-Forum is a workspace where ConceptBase users and developers share
documents, models, and software. The address is
      http://merkur.informatik.rwth-aachen.de/bscw/bscw.cgi/0/187789




Trademarks
==========

All trademarks used in this text are property of their respective owners.


Acknowledgments
===============

We thanks all ConceptBase users for their valuable feedback. 
We thank the SWI-Prolog for their excellent work and support.



-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

